---
layout: archive
title: ""
permalink: /news/
author_profile: true
redirect_from:
  - /news
---

{% include base_path %}

- I am currently working on potential applications of Kernelized Correlation Filters to hyperspectral aerial videos for object tracking. Additionally, I work on vehicle detection in the Wide-Area-Motion-Imagery (WAMI) platform by training a Deep Convolutional Neural Network with a synthetic dataset generated by DIRSIG software. Some of the positive samples in synthetic and real dataset can be seen in the figure below. The trained Deep Learning model can classify the WAMI samples with %93 accuracy.

- We submitted our paper on high speed object tracking to the Winter Application of Computer Vision Conference 2018. Some experiments on the UAV123 dataset is attached below. The experiments are carried out on an I5, 2.7 GHz processor in C++ platform on a Ubuntu OS. We propose a scale adaptive-tracker that can run on average at 416 fps on the UAV123 dataset.

- Our paper is accepted to the Perception Beyond the Visible Spectrum Workshop in conjunction with the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference 2017

- Our Hyperspectral Aerial Video Set for vehicle tracking is uploaded now. Please cite the paper below if you use this dataset for your research. Ground truth files for the vehicles in this video and a readme file can be downloaded from this link. Below, you can also find the grayscale version of the hyperspectral aerial video. Grayscale images are generated by summing the individual channels in visible wavelength range. Please do not hesitate to contact me for questions. You can find the MATLAB code with C-based detection module in this link.

- I successfully defended my Ph.D. thesis on "Aerial Vehicle Tracking using a Multi-modal Optical Sensor" as of May 16, 2016. I would like to thank my thesis committee and my advisor Dr. Hoffman and co-adviser Dr. Vodacek for their supervision throughout my Ph.D. You can find my presentation here. 

- I finished my internship at Huawei R&D where I worked on representing people with face-only and contextual features to classify individuals in a family photo album as strangers and family members. The second part of my work included desinging an album-specific classifier to assign sematic roles to family members. You can find an experiment on a family picture with strangers below. To learn contextual features, the ZFNet (Improved AlexNet) is fine-tuned on the People in Photo Album Dataset on three different areas including context. You can find the Caffe fine-tuning files in this link. For the face-only area, the pre-trained FaceNet model is used.

- Our journal paper titled "Integrating Hyperspectral Likelihoods in a Multi-dimensional Assignment Algorithm for Aerial Vehicle Tracking" has been accepted by the IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Remote Sensing and Observation. Below, you can find an example of single target tracking from a fixed aerial platform.

- For short term (2014 Summer), I worked on 3-D Cardiac segmentation using MRI slices. I presented our paper in the IEEE Western New York Image Processing Workshop. Below, you can find some results on canine (left) and sheep (right) heart segmentation. C++ implementation can be found in this link. 
