---
layout: archive
#title: "Research"
permalink: /research/
author_profile: true
redirect_from:
  - /research
---

## Research Summary
I work on securing artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms through blockchain networks to address model poisoning attacks. Machine learning algorithms are prone to data manipulation that breaks the integrity of predictions. Moreover, a central system has a single point of failure and is easily compromised. Blockchain provides provenance, integrity, decentralized, consensus-based, and fault-tolerant architecture to create trusted transactions. However, smart contracts in blockchain fail to calculate fixed-point computations limiting the plausibility of predictions through cognitive algorithms in the blockchain. I investigate the limitations of smart contracts that restrict learning capabilities in the blockchain. Moreover, I have developed a mathematical model to predict classes using machine learning algorithms. The numerical methods developed in my work arm smart contracts to estimate the likelihood of events or classes using machine learning and deep learning algorithms. Moreover, I analyzed the performance of the blockchain network to provide cognitive intelligence. I would like to extend my work further to secure AI algorithms. Moreover, my prime research interests are in computer security, distributed systems, computer networks, network security, artificial intelligence, machine learning, deep learning, blockchain, smart contracts, and consensus mechanisms. I am also open to any research related to cybersecurity and AI to produce a state-of-the-art solution.

## Research Plan
I will work on the scalability of consensus protocols to support time-sensitive applications with blockchain networks. The consensus mechanism delays block generation due to the multi-party agreement process. Moreover, current scalability solutions do not provide adequate security and decentralization. I will optimize the consensus process to lower latency and improve security and decentralization. Additionally, I will work on cross-chain communication protocols. Pre-trained machine learning models must transfer model details from one chain to another to incentivize AI developers. Furthermore, agents in the AI marketplace buy and sell models through blockchain, making blockchain interoperability inevitable. Therefore, I am interested in working on the interoperability of blockchains to enable the exchange of models between different blockchain systems. I also aim to develop a platform-agnostic cross-chain communication protocol for universal exchange and swaps. Additionally, I will work on creating a deliberative consensus model for blockchain. Validating machine learning algorithms requires semantic consensus to make qualified models. The validation requires retraining the models and agreeing on the training parameters. However, the existing blockchain consensus protocols cannot do the same and mandate a deliberative agreement of models. I will design a consensus model that supports deliberations and arguments. Furthermore, I will also work on the privacy of user information shared on a global platform. Data cooperatives, a data sharing platform, work in this context in a decentralized manner to share data for machine learning applications. But the privacy of data in data-cooperative is not guaranteed in blockchain systems. Therefore, I will work on protecting the confidentiality of information shared in the data cooperative. Following are the technical details of my proposed research plan.

* Developing Scalable Consensus Protocol for AI:  I plan to optimize the proof of stake consensus protocol by introducing faster validation methods using a lower range of block proposals, cheaper transactions, and decentralized participation of miners/validators to maintain the honesty of the systems.

* Decentralized Cross-chain Communication: I will improve cross-chain communication by optimizing atomic swaps, chain relays, and hash timeclock contracts to provide trusted and secured transactions removing the third party. Additionally, I will design decentralized collateralization in a bi-party transaction to punish fraudulent transactions.

* Consensus for Deliberative Agreement and Group Decisions:  I will work on developing deliberative agreement through natural language processing, dialogue response generation, machine learning, and consensus management. I aim to extend this work to support review and justice systems where group decision is inevitable.

* Data Cooperative Security:  I will develop a distributed secure architecture to use k-anonymity, differential privacy, and homomorphic encryption for the confidentiality of data cooperatives with blockchain systems.

* IoT Network Security: Smart contracts can enhance the integrity of DDoS detections [6]. However, blockchain consensus protocols require modification to achieve a consensus among IoT devices to detect, mitigate and recover from DDoS attacks in IoT. I will work on developing a machine learning-based consensus mechanism to detect and mitigate DDoS attacks in IoT Systems.

* Smart Legal Contracts for Metaverse: The smart legal contracts developed in [11,12,13,14] measure ambiguity in a service-level agreement. It still requires a rigorous stress test to measure the complexity and performance. I will extend these works to quantify the time, cost, complexity, and advantage index of building such a solution to help agents and shoppers in the metaverse.
