---
layout: archive
title: ""
permalink: /teaching/2021_fall_2374
author_profile: false
---

# Fall 2021 Math 2374 #
# Lecturer: Erkao Bao #


| Class	 | Section |	Days & Times	| Room	| Instructor |
|-------| --------- | --------| ------| -------- |
| 26514 | 010-LEC | WeFr 9:05AM - 9:55AM | Bruininks Hall 230 | Erkao Bao |
|  |  |   |  | |
| 26516 | 012-DIS | TuTh 9:05AM - 9:55AM | Vincent Hall 207 | Peihang Wu |
| 26516 | 012-DIS | Th 10:10AM - 11:00AM | Amundson Hall 162 | Daniel Khalitov |
| 26517 | 013-DIS | TuTh 10:10AM - 11:00AM | Vincent Hall 2 | Peihang Wu |
| 26517 | 013-DIS | Th 11:15AM - 12:05PM | Vincent Hall 2 | Daniel Khalitov |
| 26518 | 014-DIS | TuTh 11:15AM - 12:05PM | Vincent Hall 20 | HyeKyung Kim |
| 26518 | 014-DIS | Th 12:20PM - 1:10PM | Vincent Hall 2 | Daniel Khalitov |
| 27184 | 015-DIS | TuTh 12:20PM - 1:10PM | Vincent Hall 211 | HyeKyung Kim |
| 27184 | 015-DIS | Th 1:25PM - 2:15PM | Appleby Hall 319 | Daniel Khalitov | 


## Syllabus ##

### Textbook ###
- Marsden and Tromba, Vector Calculus, Sixth Edition.
- It is assumed that you are familiar with the material of sections 1.1 and 1.2.
- Sections 2.2, 3.4, 3.5, 6.3, 6.4, 7.7, and 8.5 will not be covered.

### Prerequisites ###
You must have received a grade of C- or better from Math 1372 (or equivalent).

### Exams ###
There will be 3 midterm exams and the final exam. Midterm exams occur in lecture.

- Midterm 1 occurs on Wednesday, October 6.
- Midterm 2 occurs on Wednesday, November 3.
- Midterm 3 occurs on Wednesday, December 1.
- The final exam is on Friday, December 15 from 12:00pm to 3:00pm (location Rapson Hall). This time is a common final exam time reserved for large courses like this.
In every exam, you may take one 8.5" by 11" sheet of paper of notes (handwritten only, double-sided is OK). No textbooks or calculators are allowed.

### Grading Policy ###

| Category | Grade basis |	Points each	Total | points |
| --------  | --------- | ------------------- | -------| 
| Homework |	Best 10 assigments |	10	| 100 |
| Labs |	Best 10 labs |	15	| 150 |
| Midterms |    | 120	| 360 |
| Final exam |   |	300 |	300 |
| Total |    |	  | 910 |

### Gradelines ###
We do not have fixed gradelines for this class. Typically, the distribution of the final grades is approximately 20% A, 25% B, 40% C and 15% D and F.

### Make-ups ###
Students must make arrangements in advance if they will not be handing in homework on time or will miss an exam. Exam absences due to recognized University related activities, religious holidays, verifiable illness, and family/medical emergencies will be dealt with on an individual basis. See official University Policy on Makeup Examinations for Legitimate Absences.

### Attendance ###
The class will be conducted under the presumption that you have attended all lectures, labs, and recitation sessions. In particular, you are responsible for all the announcements made in class.

### Online Readings ###
Before each lecture you should do the assigned readings on the course Moodle site. The readings go by lectures.

### Homework ###
There will be weekly homework assignments, which will be carried out through WeBWorK. Homework is due on Friday afternoons by 4pm. You have unlimited attempts to do the homework.

### Lab Assignments ###
Lab assignments are due by 5pm on the due date. Lab assignments and due dates are listed on the Moodle course page.

We encourage you to discuss lab assignments with your classmates, including strategies for solving different kinds of problems. Indeed, this is one of the best ways to improve your understanding of the course. However, when you actually write up your solutions, you must do this on your own. Collaboration during the write-up stage or handing labs that are almost identical to a classmate's is a form of cheating and may result in a score of zero for all your lab assignments.

### Scholastic Conduct ###
We expect the highest standards of conduct from members of this class. Cases of academic dishonesty will be treated with utmost seriousness. See Student Conduct Code.

### Incompletes ###
A final grade of incomplete is given only if you have successfully completed all but a small portion of the work of the course, and have a very compelling, well documented excuse from completing the course. We cannot give you an incomplete simply because you are behind in your work.

### Drop Dates ###
You may drop the course without permission by the start of the fifth week of the semester (March 15, 2013). If you drop before the start of the third week, no mention of the course will appear on your transcripts. Otherwise, you receive a "W" for the course. However, it will cost you more money to drop the course later in the semester.

### S/N Grade ###
If you are registered S/N, you will receive grade S if your letter grade is C- or above, and grade N otherwise. CSE students should not be taking this class S/N.

### Drop Deadlines ###
The schedule for drop deadlines can be found at the following site:
[http://onestop.umn.edu/dates-and-deadlines](http://onestop.umn.edu/dates-and-deadlines)

