---
layout: archive
title: ""
permalink: /teaching/2021_fall_2573h
author_profile: false
---


# Fall 2021 Math 2573H #
# Lecturer: Erkao Bao #

| Class | Section	| Days & Times |	Room	| Instructor |
|-------| --------- | --------| ------| -------- |	
| 26114 | 010-LEC  | MoWeFr 10:10AM - 11:00AM | Tate Hall 101 | Erkao Bao | 
| | | | |
| 27611 | 013-DIS | TuTh 9:05AM - 9:55AM | Vincent Hall 206 | Marshall Smith |
| 27774 | 014-DIS | TuTh 10:10AM - 11:00AM | Vincent Hall 206 | Marshall Smith |
| 27775 | 015-DIS | TuTh 10:10AM - 11:00AM | Vincent Hall 207 | Eduardo Torres Davila |

 
### Textbook ### 
- Colley, Vector Calculus, fourth edition.

### Prerequisites ### 
- You must have received a grade of C- or better from Math 1572H (or equivalent).

### Homework ### 
Homework will be assigned on canvas and gradescope. You should submit your homework on gradescope.
There will be 12 or 13 assignments depending on the course progress.

### Exams ###
There are three in-class midterms, each 50 minutes long:
- Midterm I is on Friday, October 8
- Midterm II is on Friday, November 5
- Midterm III is on Monday, November 29

The final exam is on 12pm - 3pm, Thursday, December 16 (location to be annouced toward the end of the semester).

Exam policies: No notes or books are permitted.

| Category	| Grade basis	| Points each	| Total |
| ---------- | ---------- | ----------  | -----  |
| Homework |	Best 10 | 	10	| 100 |
| Midterms	| All exams	| 200 |	600 |
| Final exam	|  | 	300	| 300 |
| Total |  | 	 	| 1000 | 

We do not have fixed gradelines for this class. Typically, the distribution of the final grades is approximately 20% A, 25% B, 40% C and 15% D and F.

### Make-ups ###
In general, there will be no make-up exams. However, in complex and unusual circumstances which are beyond your control, a make-up exam may be given on a case-by-case basis. For university policies concerning make-ups, see: [https://policy.umn.edu/education/makeupwork](https://policy.umn.edu/education/makeupwork).

### COVID, face-coverings, symptoms, and vaccination ###
___The University of Minnesota currently requires all students, staff, and faculty to wear masks when indoors regardless of vaccination status, and strongly encourages members of the campus community to get vaccinated. Resources are available for accessing vaccines.___

Please stay at home if you experience symptoms of COVID-19 and consult with your healthcare provider about an appropriate course of action. An absence due to symptoms of COVID-19 is an excused absence, and we will work with you to find the best course of action for missed work and/or class experiences.
Please see the end of this document for additional details.


### Further COVID statement ###
People who are not vaccinated are at high risk for getting and spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. New variants of the virus spread more easily and quickly, particularly among young adults, which may lead to more cases of COVID-19 among college students this fall. An increase in the number of COVID-19 cases will strain healthcare resources and lead to more hospitalizations and potentially deaths.
The best defenses against contracting COVID-19 and spreading the virus to others are vaccination and masking. All members of the University community who can be vaccinated are strongly encouraged to get vaccinated. For resources about the vaccination and how to schedule an appointment, please refer to the University’s Get the Vax initiative.
When indoors, you are currently required to wear a face covering (mask) to protect the entire community of students, faculty members, and staff. This will maintain a culture of safety to help protect all members of the community, and especially those who are immunocompromised and/or who are caretakers of others (e.g., young children) who are not yet vaccinated.
If you experience COVID-19 symptoms or symptoms of any potentially infectious respiratory illness (e.g., fever or chills, cough, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, new loss of taste or smell, sore throat, congestion or runny nose), you should stay home or in your residence hall room and not come to class. Please consult with your healthcare provider about an appropriate course of action, and please consult the M-test program for COVID testing resources. Such an absence is an excused absence.
Note that the pandemic guidelines update regularly in response to guidance from health professionals and the prevalence of the virus in our community. You will be notified of any changes.

### Contingency planning ###
During the semester, it may become necessary to adjust the format of the class based on the need for students or the instructor to self-isolate. 
- If some students need quarantine, the instructor will record the lecture on put it online, which may result in lecturing via ipad instead of blackboard.
- If the instructor needs quarantine, the course will be given on zoom or by a substitute instructor.

### University Policies ###
- Academic freedom and responsibility: For information about academic freedom and responsibilities, consult the Board of Regents Policy.
- Disability accommodations: The Disability Resource Center (DRC) is the campus office that collaborates with students who have disabilities to provide and/or arrange reasonable accommodations. If you have, or think you have, a disability in any area such as mental health, attention, learning, chronic health, sensory, or physical, please contact the DRC office at (612)626-1333 or visit https://diversity.umn.edu/disability to arrange a confidential discussion regarding equitable access and reasonable accommodations.
- Equity, diversity, equal opportunity, and affirmative action: The University provides equal access to and opportunity in its programs and facilities, without regard to race, color, creed, religion, national origin, gender, age, marital status, disability, public assistance status, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression. For more information, please consult the Board of Regents Policy.
- Mental health and stress management: As a student you may experience a range of issues that can cause barriers to learning, such as strained relationships, increased anxiety, alcohol/drug problems, feeling down, difficulty concentrating and/or lack of motivation. These mental health concerns or stressful events may lead to diminished academic performance and may reduce your ability to participate in daily activities. University of Minnesota services are available to assist you. You can learn more about the broad range of confidential mental health services available on campus via the Student Mental Health Website: http://www.mentalhealth.umn.edu.
- Sexual harassment: Sexual harassment means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and/or other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual’s work or academic performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive working or academic environment in any University activity or program. Such behavior is not acceptable in the University setting. For additional information, please consult the Board of Regents Policy.
For additional information on university policies, see
https://policy.umn.edu/education/syllabusrequirements-appa
Note: Information contained in the course syllabus may be subject to change with advance notice, as deemed appropriate by the instructor.

### Scholastic conduct ###
We expect the highest standards of conduct from members of this class. Academic dishonesty in any form will not be tolerated. See the Student Conduct Code.

### Incompletes ###
A final grade of incomplete is given only if you have successfully completed all but a small portion of the work of the course, and have a very compelling, well documented reason for not completing the course. You cannot receive an incomplete simply because you are behind in your work; in this case you should drop the course.

### Drop dates ###
You may drop the course without permission by the start of the fifth week of the semester. If you drop before the start of the third week, no mention of the course will appear on your transcripts. Otherwise, you receive a "W" for the course. However, it will cost you more money to drop the course later in the semester. 
