---
layout: archive
title: ""
permalink: /teaching/2022_fall_8301
author_profile: false
---

# Math 8301: Manifold and Topology #


### Time ### 
3:35pm - 4:25 pm MWF 
### Location ###
Vincent Hall 20


### Office ### 
Vincent Hall 365
### Zoom Meeting ID ###
[973 584 3950](https://umn.zoom.us/j/9735843950)
Requires umn.edu zoom account

### Office hours ### 
TBD

### Textbooks ### 
Textbooks are not required. The following two books can be used as self reading materials.
- [Algebraic topology by Allen Hatcher.](https://pi.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/AT/AT.pdf)
- [Introduction to Topological Manifolds (Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 202) 2nd ed. 2011 Edition by John Lee](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-1-4419-7940-7)


### Contents ###
Classification of compact surfaces, fundamental group/covering spaces. Homology group, basic cohomology. Application to degree of a map, invariance of domain/dimension.

A detailed day by day plan can be found on [Canvas](here).

### Prerequisites ### 
Some point-set topology and abstract algebra. In particular, you should be comfortable with connectedness, compactness, Hausdorfness, (co)kernels of linear maps, as well as groups, rings and linear algebra.

### Homework ### 
Homework will be assigned on weekly on [Canvas](https://erkaobao.github.io/math/teaching/2022_fall_8301).
Collaboration on homework is encouraged.

### Exams ###
There are one midterm exam and one final exam. Both exams are take home exams. No collaboration is allowed. You can use books or notes, but you are not allowed to use internet for the exams.
 - Final exam:
  Exam time is TBD.

 - Midterm exam:
  Exam time is TBD.


### Grading policy ###
Your grade is based on homework(60%) and the exams(40%).
