---
layout: archive
title: ""
permalink: /teaching/2023_fall_5378
author_profile: false
---

# Math 5378: Differential Geometry - Fall 2023

## Course Details

- **Class Meetings:** 
  - Time: 02:30 PM - 03:20 PM, MWF
  - Location: *Vincent Hall 2*

- **Instructor:** 
  - Name: Erkao Bao
  - Office: Vincent Hall 356
  - Email: my last name at umn dot edu

- **Course Management:** 
  - Platform: [Canvas](https://canvas.umn.edu/courses/413901) 
  - All class announcements and assignments will be posted on canvas.

- **Instructor Office Hours:** *To be determined*

- **Textbook:** 
  - Title: "Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces" by Do Caromo
  - Errata: [List compiled by Bjorn Poonen](link-to-errata)

## Course Objectives

To familiarize students with the foundational principles of differential geometry with emphasis on curves and surfaces in space. The curriculum includes:
- Basic theory of curves
- Frenet formulas
- Basic theory of surfaces
- Curvature
- Geodesics
- Parallel transport
- Gauss-Bonnet theorem

[Detailed Weekly Course Topics Breakdown](https://canvas.umn.edu/courses/413901/pages/detailed-course-content?module_item_id=10416233)

## Prerequisites

- Multivariable calculus (Math 2263 or equivalent)
- Linear algebra
- Differential equations (Math 2243 or equivalent)

## Academic Support

1. Participate in study groups.
2. Utilize the [SMART Learning Commons](https://www.lib.umn.edu/spaces/tasc) for free tutoring across Twin Cities Campuses.
3. Attend instructor's office hours (refer to 'Course Details' for timing).

## Assessments

### Homework
- Frequency: Weekly on Canvas
- Submission: Via Canvas
- Evaluation: A few problems from each problem set will be selected for grading. Your lowest problem set score will be dropped from your final grade.

### Midterm Exam 1
- Duration: 1 hour
- Date & Time: *To be determined*
- Location: *To be determined*

### Midterm Exam 2
- Duration: 1 hour
- Date & Time: *To be determined*
- Location: *To be determined*

### Final Exam
- Duration: 2 hours
- Date & Time: *To be determined*

### Make-Up Tests Policy
- No make-up tests will be provided.
- Final exam attendance is mandatory.
- If a midterm exam is missed, the following weighted average of remaining exams will be used to determine the score:
  - Midterm 1: 1
  - Midterm 2: 1
  - Final Exam: 2
  - For instance, if Midterm Exam 1 is missed, the score will be calculated as follows: 
    - Max_possible_midterm_exam_1_score * (1 * your_midterm_exam_2_score/max_possible_midterm_exam_2_score + 2 * your_final_exam_score/max_possible_final_exam_score)/(1+2)

## Grading Policy
- Homework: 40%
- Each Midterm: 15%
- Final Exam: 30%

## Calculator Policy
- Calculators are not required and will not be permitted during exams.

## Important Dates
- **Mon, Sep 18, 2023:** Last date to drop full semester or first 7-week session classes without a "W" grade
- **Midterm Exam 1:** *To be determined*
- **Midterm Exam 2:** *To be determined*
- **Final Exam:** *To be determined*
