---
title: "[CS50] 10-2 Shorts"
date: 2024-06-06
permalink: /study/2024-06-06-cs50-10-2
categories: CS50
tags:
  - Web
---

In this post, the shorts video of the tenth lecture of CS50 is summarized.

# Internet Primer
When you change your Wi-Fi network on your computer, you don't see one called internet which means somethings exist in between you and internet.
## DHCP 
- We cannot simply pick IP address we want. Then how do we get an IP address in the first place? Somewhere between your computer and the Internet at large exits a Dynamic Host Configration Protocal server, whose role is to assign IP addresses to devices.
- Prior to the widespread promulgation of DHCP, the task of assigning IP addresses fell to a system administrator, who would need to manually assign such addresses.

## DNS
- Odds are, you've usually don't tried to visit a website by typing its IP address into your browser.
- The Domain Name System translates IP addresses to more memorable names that are more human-comprehensible.
- DNS is somewhat liek the yellow pages of the web.
!!! img
Not every name that maps is actually clear what it is. Sometimes somebody who owns an IP address might name their host somethiing that they're actually not. For example, the IP address in the middle of the table is actually google.com. But Google has a lot of different servers and they can't call them all google.com. So they have their own internal system for translating google.com to whatever server actually is connected to that IP address. 
- Much like there is no yellow pages of the world, there is really no DNS record of the entire internet.
- Rather, large DNS server systems (like Google's own) are more like aggregators, collecting smaller sets of DNS information and pooling them together, updating frequently.
- In that way, large DNS servers are like libraries that stock many different sets of local yellow page books. In order to have the most up-to-date phone numbers for businesses, libraries must update the books they have on hand.
- DNS record sets are thus fairly decentralized.

## Access Points
- One of the ways we've dealt with the IPv4 addressing problem is to start assigning multiple people to the same IP address.
- The IP address is assigned to a router, whose job it is to act as a traffic cop that allows data requests from all of the devices on your local network (your home or business, e.g.) to be processed through a single IP address.
- Modern home networks, consist of access points that combine a router, a modem, a switch, and other technologies together into a single device.
- Modern business networks or large-scale wide-area networks (WANs) still frequently have these as separate devices to allow the size of their network to scale more easily.
!!! img
Now we know what's between you and internet.

## Internet
But what exactly internet is? It's really just all these individual networks at my house, and at every other house, inter-connected. Instead of thinking about the internet as this giant cloud, this ethereal thing that exists out there, it's really just a connection among all of these networks. 
!!! img
And somewhere on these networks exists the services we want. To get information about something, we traverse this chain of networks to get the information we want. Information can flow through networks. How? The internet is really a system of protocols.
!!! img


# Internet Protocal (IP)
The last picture above is bit misleading because it implies all 3 networks have a connection to one another. And when I talk about a connection here, I'm talking about a physical, wired connection. We do have wireless, but it's really impractical for data to be transmitted wirelessly over a large scale. So at some point, we do rely on wired technology - telephone wires, fiber optic wires, etc. 
- Modern Internet consists of a lot of networks. We can't afford to wire them together such that each directly connects with every other. If we're trying to connect to a network in Asia or in Europe, we're going to have to span an entire ocean. We're going to need to use wires at some point, but we want to minimize the number of wires.
- This is where routers come back. What if, instead of being connected to every other network, each network has connected to a limited number of routers (ecah of which was connected to other nearby routers), and each router had instructions built into it on how to move information toward its destination?
- This information might be stored in a routing table, inside of the router.
For the illustration, let's assume each device has IP addresses in the range of n.x.x.x, where n is its netwrok number.
!!! img
Above is the problematic situation where we don't use routers.
!!! img
Instead, we use routers. !1 means if I see an address that does't start with 1, I'm going to pass it off to a router. All 6 networks can still connect to every other network but they're not physically connected anymore.
- On a small scale, this configuration may be inefficient. On a large scale, this configuration dramatically reduce the costs of network infrastructure. 
