---
title: "[Python] Advanced Concepts"
date: 2025-02-14
permalink: /study/2025-02-14-python-1
categories: Python
tags:
  - Python
---

In this post, advanced concepts and grammar of python is introduced.

# Story 00 Object
Objects are Python's abstraction for data. All data in a Python program is represented by objects or by relations between objects. Code is also represented by objects. Every object has an identity, a type and a value.
Some objects contain references to other objects; there are called containters. e.g., tuples, lists and dictionaries. 

## Identity
- An object’s identity never changes once it has been created
- you may think of it as the object’s address in memory
- id() function returns an integer representing its identity
- is operator compares the identity of two objects

## Type
- An object’s type determines the operations that the object supports
- Defines the possible values for objects of that type
- type() function returns an object’s type (type itself is an object )
- an object’s type is also unchangeable.

## Value
- The value of some objects can change
- Objects whose value can change are said to be mutable
- Objects whose value is unchangeable once they are created are called immutable

## C vs Python : What happens when we assign a value to a variable?
```c
// C
int num = 3;
```
1. The literal 3 is stored in the code or constant area of memory.
2. A memory space for the variable num is allocated in the stack area.
3. The value of the literal 3 is copied and stored in the variable num.
- The value 3 is directly stored in the memory space allocated for num. 
- The variable itself has a memory space and stores a value at a specific address. 
- When the value is changed to 5, the new value 5 is stored in the memory space that num points to. The original 3 remains in the code area.

```python
# python
num = 3
```
1. The literal 3 is stored as an object in the heap area. 
2. The variable num is created and references the memory address of the 3 object. 
- In Python, a variable acts as a pointer to 3. When the value is changed to 5, it points to a new 5 object. If no one references the original 3, it is deleted by the garbage collector.


# Story 01 Ref_Counter & Garbage Collector
```python
r1=[1,2,3] # reference count of [1,2,3] is 1
r2=r1      # reference count of [1,2,3] is 2
r1='simple'# reference count of [1,2,3] is 1
r2='happy' # reference count of [1,2,3] is 0 -> Garbage Collection
```

# Story 02 Mutability
For **immutable types**, operations that compute new values may actually return a reference to an existing object with the same type and value (to save memory)(Note that a = b = 1 always assigns the same object to both a and b.) 
```python
a=1
b=1
print(a is b) #True
a=2000
b=2000
print(a is b) #False
a=b=2000
print(a is b) #True

word="string"
word1="string2"
print(word is word1) # True string is immutable
s="1132423423141234fads"
s1="1132423423141234fads" 
print(s is s1) # True
```

For mutable objects, it is NOT allowed for operations that compute new values to return a reference to any existing object(Note that c = d = [] assigns the same object to both c and d.)
```python
c=[]
d=[]
print(c is d) # print False
c=d=[]
print(c is d) # print True
```

# Story 03 Shallow/Deep Copy
**Repetition** returns a concatenated list of **shallow copies** of a list(the last word list refers to the inner list of a, 3 lists [],[],[] are shallow copy of one another)
```python
# [] is mutable
a=[[]]*3
a[0].append(1)
print(a) # [[1], [1], [1]]
```

```python
# 1 is immutable
a=[1]*3
a[0]=3
print(a) # [3, 1, 1]
```

**Slicing** returns a **shallow copy** of the list
```python
a=[[1],[2],[3],[4]]
b=a[1:3]
b[1].append(7)
print(a) # [[1], [2], [3, 7], [4]]
```

## Problems of Shallow copy
1. [0]*cols part has no problem because 0 is immutable. One evidence is that after change, the list becomes [32,0], not [0,0]
2. [[0,0]]*rows part has a problem because [0,0] is mutable. One evidence is that after change, the list becomes [[32,0],[32,0],[32,0]], not [[32,0],[0,0],[0,0]]
```python
rows=3
cols=2
a=[[0]*cols]*rows
a[0][0]=32
print(a) # [[32, 0], [32, 0], [32, 0]]
```
One way of solving this problem by not using deepcopy is introduced below.
```python
rows=3
cols=2
a=[]
for row in range(rows):
  a+=[[0]*cols]
a[0][0]=32
print(a) # [[32, 0], [0, 0], [0, 0]]
```

## Another ex of Shallow copy
```python
a=[0,[0],0]
b=list(a) # shallow copy
c=a
print(a is b) # false
print(a is c) # true

a[0]=2
a[1].append(3)

print(a) # [2, [0, 3], 0] 
print(b) # [0, [0, 3], 0]
print(c) # [2, [0, 3], 0]
```
list(a) creates a new list object, meaning b is a different list from a, even though they contain the same elements.

By using **deepcopy**, immutable type objects will be shallow copied, and mutable type objects will be deep copied.
```python
J2021=['John',('man','USA'),[175,23]]
import copy
J2022=copy.deepcopy(J2021)
J2022[2][1]+=1
print(J2021) # ['John', ('man', 'USA'), [175, 23]]
print(J2022) # ['John', ('man', 'USA'), [175, 24]]
```