---
title: 'The theory of bad cards'
excerpt: ""
date: 2023-05-22
permalink: /posts/2023/05/daily-notes-22/
tags:
  - Daily
  - Mottos
---

Once heard of the song 'the gambler' by Kenny Rogers, the lyrics therein deeply touched me and motivated me: 'every hand's a winner and every hand's a loser'. The principle resembles the ancient Chinese idiom '塞翁失马，焉知非福', which means a blessing in disguise. 

When I was a child, I lived in a small town at the east of China. However, I learned a lot about the broad world from the Internet, and I decided to go on an adventure to find more, to comprehend more, and to experience more since I was young. Motivated by such a faith, I had always been very positive about everything in my life. It seemed as if heaven had always favored me. Everything in my life was so propitious. 




Additionally, this song also contains other enlightening counsels, e.g., 'you never count your money when you're sittin' at the table, there'll be time enough for countin' when the dealing's done'.

The followings are some other mottos themed 'bad cards':

Starting with bad cards is bad luck, to play good it is capability! 

Has fortune dealt you some bad CARDS, then let wisdom make you a good gamester.

People like me are never dealt a good hand. We just have to play with the cards we get.

When you get a bad hand CARDS, sometimes really want to quit, but our life still have to walk.

In life, no one is dealt with a perfect hand. Some are just dealt with higher CARDS and some will choose to try and change those CARDS. 

Poor fate can't die shoulder, back nor hard top. No matter how bad the brand potential also want to stick it out.

Life is a hand which God sends to you, no matter how bad you are, you have to hold it.