---
title: 'Course Reviews of UC Berkeley CS, Statistics, and Data Science Prerequesites'
date: 2022-05-24
permalink: /posts/2022/05/Course-Reviews/
tags:
  - Data Science
  - Computer Science
  - Statistics
  - CS
  - CS70
  - CS61A
  - CS61B
  - Math 53
  - Math 54
  - Data 8
---

I've now completed all prerequesites for the CS, DS, and Stats majors here were my thoughts

Overview
------
The prerequsites at Berkeley certainly have a mixed response from students and the three majors for which I have taken the prerequisites for have wildly different systems for their prerequisites. To give proper context I will list them below, however for those of you who have already taken these classes you might as well skip this section.  
### Computer Science
A GPA of 3.3 is require in the three courses below

|Course | Description                                         |
| ------| ----------------------------------------------------|
| CS61A | Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs   |
| CS61B | Data Structures                                     |
| CS70  | Discrete Mathematics and Probability Theory         |

This is often a large source of stress to students due to the difficulty of the courses and a multitude of other factors that I will get into within my review of the courses. 
### Data Science 
All prerequiste courses must be completed with a 'C-' or better

|Course | Description                                         |
| ------| ----------------------------------------------------|
| Data 8| Foundations of Data Science   |
| Math 1B | Calculus II                                   |
| Math 54  | Linear Algebra         |
| CS61A | Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs   |
| CS61B | Data Structures                                     |

Note that there are other requirements, such as Calculus I (Math 1A), or alternate course options such as the Math 10 or 16 series for the Calculus requirement, CS88 for the intro CS requirement, and a multitude of alternates for Linear Algebra that I did not include in the above table, because they are both less popular and I did not take them. 
### Statistics 
3.2 Required within Math Prerequisites, C or better in Data 8, and B- or better for Data 140.

|Course | Description                                         |
| ------| ----------------------------------------------------|
| Data 8| Foundations of Data Science   |
| Math 1B | Calculus II                                   |
| Math 53 | Multivariable Calculus   |
| Math 54  | Linear Algebra         |
| Data 140 | Probability for Data Science                                     |

A similar principle of alternate courses was used as in Data Science. 

Computer Science Reviews
------
I certainly have a feeling that this will be the longest section and that's for good reason. These classes are certainly controversial due to numerous factors from funding, to grade pressure, to course structure, and I will get into each of those aspects for each of these courses. 

### CS61A
Overall Rating: 9/10

The grade in this class was based almost entirely on test scores. There were Homeworks, Labs, and Projects, however you were essentially required to get 100% on these which lead to virtually the entirety of variance in scores to be based on the exams. The homeworks and labs were extremely effective at teaching the material, and the projects were not only engaging, but really taught me a lot. I took the class with Professor Pamela Fox and Professor Paul Hilfinger, I got a lot out of Professor Fox's lectures, less-so from Hilfinger, which was certainly not a unique phenomena. The cons of this class I believe were well summed up by Professor Fox herself
> "only 15% of students who reported no prior experience in programming were able to achieve a B+ or better (3.3+) in CS61A. Self-studying can work theoretically, but you'd need to also study the exams, since the exam scores are what make/break the grades."

Though I was able to be part of that 15%, I believe it is a little bit problematic when the best predictor of success, more than attendance, hours-spent, etc., was previous expreience. Overall, its hard to blame that on the class, however, since it is pretty explicit when they say that it is not a completely introductory class and that students should be comfortable with coding before taking the course. Overall, advice I would give for the course is grind out practice exams and to not take it before you are properly prepared. 

### CS61B 
Overall Rating: 4/10

The pros of the class are that you leave the class with knowledge that is enough to be ready for any Software Engineer internship. However, I believe despite that, the class is extremely poorly structured. I took this course with Professor Hilfinger and I'm sure everyone would agree (considering there were only ever 50 other people at lecture) that the lectures were not helpful at all. The Homeworks and Labs often took a signifcant amount of time with limited resources if you got stuck. The projects took a substansial amount of time, a few of them pushed 100 hours for a big proportion of students, there were limited resources (Office Hour Queues were hours long and often limited help was able to be provided). Ultimately, I know many people get get a lot out of the course, and I would be lying if I said I did not learn a substansial amount from the class. However, I believe due to the extreme workload, poor class structure, and lack of experience required for the class, I got a lot less out of the class than I would have at another similar University's Data Structures course.

### CS70
Overall Rating: 7/10

I took the course with Professor Rao (great person, not the greatest lecturer) and Professor Sen (not the biggest fan). The class is almost entirely exam based, although there is an additional weekly homework that is extremely difficult. There is a no homework option, but despite the difficulty, I think the homeworks were very helpful. Not a lot of Computer Science majors enjoy this class and it is notorious for good reason. This class is extremely difficult, has a super fast pace, and is completely different than the CS61 series. However, I really enjoyed the class and I believe that despite the naysayers, it is extremely possible to succeed in this course. I believe CS70 is hated for two main reasons. The first is people do not take the proper prep courses. This is a class that, though I hate the term, requires a significant amount of Mathematical Maturity. One should definitely take classes like Math 53/54 and/or EECS16 series courses before taking this course. However, too many students simply rush into  the class so they can declare. Additionally, CS70, like other math classes, is simply not bingeable. In the CS61 series a lot of students can just spend a couple days grinding practice exams (CS61A) or projects (CS61B/C) before they occur and get away with it. That is just simply not possible in CS70. Attendance is absolutely abysmal in CS70 and it’s just not a course you can be not present for and do well. Overall, the reason I bring all this up is because, contrary to popular belief, I think CS70 is a pretty well run class, it is rather the context in which people take it that leads to the concerns many have.

Data Science and Math Reviews
------

### Data 8
Overall Rating: 10/10

I think this is quite possibly one of the most well executed classes at UC Berkeley. There's a reason the curriculum for this course has been adapted by many universities around the world. Overall, the class does not go super deep, however introduces Data Science thinking extremely well. The homeworks, labs, and projects are all very enlightening, the lectures are well done (I took the course with Professor Wagner and Professor Sahai), and the exams are fair. Overall, I didn't get a lot out of the class (I believe this is a common exprience for students who had taken AP Stats or something similar before) other than learning how to use Jupyter Notebooks, but despite that I really enjoyed the class.

### Math 1B 
Overall Rating: 6/10

I had Professor Paulin, who was great and had very good lectures. Overall, everything about the course was good overall. I think my qualms with the course is ultimately with the content. I think the course spends way too much time on topics that are not extremely relevant like infinite sequences and series. This serves to make the course a little bit dull and boring. The course structure was a little unique due to Covid with there being a test at the end of each module instead of midterms and finals. To be completely honest, I think I most likely should have just skipped into Math 53, but there was a part of me that was a little intimidated to begin difficult math in college. 

### Math 53 
Overall Rating: 6/10

I took this course over the summer and I had a lot of the similar feelings as I did with Math 1B. There was nothing really wrong with the course, I just did not find it extremely engaging. That being said, I learned everything I needed and did pretty well in the course. The structure was pretty straight forward with quizzes throughout the semester and homeworks. Definintely a helpful class, just tedious math that seems pointless at times. 

### Math 54
Overall Rating: 9/10

This is another one of my ratings that I feel like may be unpopular and that is due to the professor. I had the class with Professor Wehrheim, which is definitely a completely different interation to the course with any other professor. The professor taught the course in a super unique way that was not enjoyed by most. They essentially gave you workscripts (Google Docs textbooks written by them) and told you to teach yourself. And while I understand why this frustrated a lot of students, it really encouraged a lot of mathematical maturity in me. They additionally taught the course in an extremely abstract manner, which I viewed as a positive, as linear algebra is best taught conceptually not through a bunch of matrices. That being said, I certainly had to supplement my learning with 3Blue1Brown and talking to friends. The course structure was unique with weekly quizzes (with one redo), interesting homework (that did not resemble any problem set), and a final project. Though I understand why a lot of students did not enjoy the class, I believe I took a lot out of the class both in content and as a learner. 

### Data 140 (aka Prob 140)
Overall Rating: 9/10

What a unique class, I took it with Professor Sahai, and I certainly feel like this class is the hardest I'd ever taken at the point, granted I think I took it a little too early. It's a class that made me understand why I want to study stats, but at the same time made me doubt why I was even studying something so difficult. However, it was definitely a good difficult, and almost felt like climbing a mountain in how rewarding it was to make it to the top. The class is certainly one that requires a lot of dedication and struggling. The course had one midterm, one final, a few quizzes and a weekly lab and homework (though not everyone agress with me, I thought the homeworks were harder than CS70's). The final was unique in that it was the first final I've ever taken at Berkeley where not a single person finished early. Overall, this is a great course and has overprepared me for courses it is a prerequesite for (Stat 135, Data 102, CS 189, etc.). I would highly reccomend taking either this course or EECS126 as your probability course, because despite their difficulty, you will get a lot more out of it than a class like Stat 134 or IndEng 172.


