---
layout: post
title: "vim with git"
date: 2018-11-02
category: ["computer", "editor", "markdown"]
author: "Sung-Cheol Kim"

---

# How to commit changes to git server using vim editor

There are couple of vim plugins for using git commands inside vim.

- [vimagit](https://github.com/jreybert/vimagit)
- [vim-fugitive](https://github.com/tpope/vim-fugitive)
- [vim-gitgutter](https://github.com/airblade/vim-gitgutter)

## vim-fugitive

Once you installed this package, you can use git commands inside vim using commands such as `:Git`, `:Gcommit`, `:Gstatus`.

In typical usage, the workflow is following.

- Creating a file and adding to the repository.
- Modifying a file and committing changes to the repository.
- Uploading updated files to the server.

For each tasks, we can use git commands in a terminal. But by using fugitive package, those tasks can be done as following.

- `:Gwrite` to save file and add to a repository.
- `:Gstatus` to see the modifications
- `:Gcommit` to commit the changes. If you have multiple changes, you should put `-a` option.
- `:Gpush` to upload to the server.

In vim, you can also find more help about vim-fugitive by typing `:help fugitive`. There are more commands that I listed above.

Currently, with neovim shows the following error message when you submit `:Gcommit` command. But the `:Gcommit` command seems working. And `:Gpush` does not show any messages.

```
Error detected while processing DirChanged Auto commands for "*":
E16: Invalid range: call rpcnotify(3, "python_chdir", v:event.cwd)
```

## vim-gitgutter

This plugin shows line-by-line status of the file while you modify file. New lines have a `+` sign on the right column and modified lines have a `~` sign.

## vimagit

I did not use it before and do not have much information.
