---
title: 'LDPC Edge Distribution Optimization II: Global Optimization'
date: 2020-07-14
permalink: /posts/2020/07/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - LDPC
  - Optimization
  - research
---

Introduction
===
Global optimization approach can also be used in finding good edge distributions with desired coderate. Ref [1] used differential evolution (DE) to find optimal edge distribution under erasure channel, Ref [2] mentioned that DE can be used to design edge distribution under AWGN channel. There are also other papers that utilize DE to desige edge distributions for NB-LDPC code (NB-LDPC code will be introduced in the future). In this post, we first introduce [differential evolution][3](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1008202821328), then we will discuss how to implement DE to design LDPC code.

P.S. *There are also somthing that I couldn't fully understand, I will post my opinions and thoughts, you are very welcome to discuss with me via [my email](lfwang@g.ucla.edu)*.




Reference
===
1. Shokrollahi, A., and R. Storn. 2000. “Design of Efficient Erasure Codes with Differential Evolution.” In 2000 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (Cat. No.00CH37060), 5 –.
2. Richardson, T. J., M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke. 2001. “Design of Capacity-Approaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes.” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory / Professional Technical Group on Information Theory 47 (2): 619–37.
3. Storn, Rainer, and Kenneth Price. 1997. “Differential Evolution – A Simple and Efficient Heuristic for Global Optimization over Continuous Spaces.” Journal of Global Optimization 11 (4): 341–59.