---
title: 'Academic Paper Writing'
date: 2020-04-23
permalink: /posts/2020/04/paper/

---
Updated on July 16, 2020.

Today's meeting with my supervisor inspired me to re-think where we should submit and publish our researches. Mainly, pay careful attention to the scope and aim of journals. And, at the very beginning of writing up a paper, i.e. a framework level, think and decide where to submit. This can affect how you write and what information to include. A good example is [IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine (RAM)](https://www.ieee-ras.org/publications/ram). Its `Aim and Scope` is 

"
The IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine is a unique technology publication which is peer-reviewed, readable and substantive. The Magazine is a forum for articles which fall between the academic and theoretical orientation of scholarly journals and vendor sponsored trade publications.

The IEEE Transactions on Robotics and the IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering publish advances in theory and experiment that underpin the science of robotics and automation. The Magazine **complements** these publications and seeks to present new scientific results to the **practicing engineer** through a focus on working systems and emphasizing creative solutions to real-world problems and **highlighting implementation details**.

The Magazine publishes regular technical articles that undergo a peer review process overseen by the Magazine's associate editors; special issues on important and emerging topics in which all articles are fully reviewed but managed by guest editors; **tutorial articles** written by leading experts in their field; and regular columns on topics including education, industry news, IEEE RAS news, technical and regional activity and a calendar of events.
"

The key information about RAM are: 
1. Similar to JFR, it focuses on working systems and solutions to real-world problems, verification on real robots are essential. 
2. Good tutorials articles are welcomed. 

---
---

I just finished reviewing a paper submitted to a top journal on May 9, 2020. Here are some lessons I learned from it about writing my own paper:

1. Do NOT afraid to submit your paper to a respectable journal, it's NOT that hard to get accepted. Even got rejected, you get useful reviews and increase the possibility to be accepted later. 

2. Write logically and concisely. Think what's the purpose of each section, paragraph, and sentence. Don't add meaningless sentences. For paper length, technical details are way more useful information. 

3. Use pictures well. Do give clear explanations under each picture. Pictures are key to make a paper easy to follow and well organized. 

4. Don't bluff, don't talk big. Speak honestly and clearly what is your contributions. Engineering works are great contributions. Interdispline is not necessary unless it's something. 


--- 
---

After going through the book [How to be a Modern Scientist](https://leanpub.com/modernscientist) by Dr. Jeff Leek, I am very impressed by
his precise and manageable methods to gain more success in academia. Especially his [academic paper writing](https://github.com/jtleek/firstpaper)
deeply speaks to me. Here are the most highlight points I will follow for all my future paper writings. 

* When to start writing?
  * One good principle to keep in mind is **"the perfect is the enemy of the very good"** Another one is that a published 
paper in a respectable journal beats a paper you just never submit because you want to get it into the "best" journal.

* How to start writing?

  1. Once you have a set of results and are ready to start writing up the paper the first thing is _not to write_. The first thing you should do is create a set of 1-4 publication-quality plots (see Chapter 10 [here](http://leanpub.com/datastyle)). Show these to Jeff to get confirmation on them before proceeding.  
  2. Start a project on [Overleaf](https://www.overleaf.com/) and invite Jeff to join.  
  3. Write up a story around the four plots in the simplest language you feel you can get away with, while still reporting all of the technical details that you can. 
  4. Go back and add references in only after you have finished the whole first draft. 
  5. Add in additional technical detail in the supplementary material if you need it. 
  6. Write up a reproducible version of your code that returns exactly the same numbers/figures in your paper with no input parameters needed. 

This is golden advice. I also found the [paper outline](https://github.com/neurodata/nd_template/blob/master/Draft/readme.md) he recommended is super helpful to make the paper organized and easy to check what part you are missing. I quote as my personal notes as follows. 

---
---

## Abstract


Abstract is structured like introduction, but shorter, typically 125 to 250
words, definitely only 1 paragraph.

## Introduction


The introduction has a minimum of 3 paragraph, possibly more, all following the
OCARF structure.

-   **Opportunity**: This is described in a single paragraph. Convey that there
    is now some awesome **opportunity** emerging, because our colleagues have
    been working very hard doing brilliant stuff. We are on the cusp of learning
    something fundamental, that we've never been able to ascertain before.
    Remember to funnel down, from most general opportunity (eg, understanding
    the neural code for behavior), to the very specific one (eg, understanding
    which neurons may be causally involved in larval drosophila behavior). Also
    remember that this is an opportunity to tell your readers (upon whose
    shoulders your work is built), how awesome they are. They did so much great
    work to get us to the point that we could add this cherry on top.

-   **Gap**: Last sentence of 1st paragraph: but, there is a **gap**: something
    that we don't know, how don't know how to do, that resolves the age old
    mystery.

-   **Challenge**: At least 1 paragraph, maybe 1 per challenge. Explain that
    resolving this **gap**, to address **opportunity**, is very challenging for
    a number of reasons. State reasons from most obvious to least. For each,
    give credit to colleagues who have brought us much closer, though not close
    enough yet. This is another opportunity to remind the readers how great they
    are, and how you could not possibly have done with work without standing on
    their shoulders.

-   **Action**: This gets about 1 paragraph, maybe a little less. Key is
    explaining how the *action* we took addresses the *challenges* we faced, to
    fill the *gap* that existed in the literature, which now resolves the
    original **opportunity**.

-   **Resolution:** This couple sentences **resolves** the **gap**. In other
    words, there was an opportunity, that opportunity no longer exists. This
    likely includes: (i) theory, (ii) simulated experiments, (iii) real data
    analysis, (iv) model checking / synthetic data analysis.

-   **Future**: 1-2 sentences explaining what new *opportunities* now arise, by
    virtue of our resolution.

## Results


### Overview


### Simulated Experiments


## Illustrative Example


First result always illustrates the main conclusion from the paper, either via a
simulation or real data example.

## Toy Example


Next is a toy problem, that enables us to build our intuition as to why this
approach is useful.

## Complicated Examples


Stress test the method, demonstrating the extreme cases of where it works when
it should, and even when it shouldn't. Possibly this includes simulated
benchmarks.

### Theoretical Results


### Benchmark Experiments


Some real data analysis, demonstrating that our approach outperforms other
methods on several benchmark datasets.

### Experiments on Novel Datasets


A motivating example perhaps, that justifies the development of this method in
the first place.

## Discussion


-   **Summary**: In a paragraph, summarize, in a reverse funnel fashion, stating
    the precise result, and then zooming out to show its relationship to the
    more general problem. Explain how this result changes the life of the
    reader. What can she do now, that she couldn't do before?

-   **Related Work**: In about 2 paragraphs, talk about the most closely related
    results (\~1 paragraph per). Remember, the authors of these works are your
    reviewers, colleagues, and friends, so be as generous as possible, without
    stomping on your own parade. There is no reason to be at all negative of
    anybody else's work, just highlight the advantages of this work.

-   **Future**: Explain how this work enables the next work. What problems are
    now open, that we not possible to address before, or perhaps not even
    conceived of before? This also should funnel out, from the most specific
    problems, ending with the most general ones.

These are articles [@Caruana08], [@Delgado14].

## Methods


-   **Problem**: In a paragraph, describe the problem. Start with the most
    general formulation of the methods, and funnel down, much like in the first
    paragraph of the intro. For example, perhaps start with supervised learning,
    then classification, then 2-class classification, then high-dimensional
    two-class classification.

-   **Model**: In a few sentences, write down the most general statistical model
    under investigation. Perhaps it is non-parameteric, or perhaps it is a
    state-space model. Then, start making a series of simplifying assumptions.
    For each assumption, justify why you've made it. The only valid
    justifications that I now of are: (i) analytic tractability, (ii)
    computational efficiency, (iii) physical realism, (iv) reducing variance, or
    (v) increasing interpretability/understandability.

-   **Algorithm**: In a paragraph, describe the algorithm. Be as specific as
    possible. Include a pseudocode table, possibly to be put in appendix. Refer
    to equations in text where possibe.

-   **Simulations**: Describe simulation settings. This should essentially be
    parameters of the model specified above. 1 paragraph/bullet point per
    simulation study.

-   **Data**: In a couple sentences per dataset, describe it. Be sure to
    include, at a minimum, (i) a link to where it came from, (ii) the number of
    samples, (iii) the dimensionality, (iv) if any missing data, explain, (v) if
    any know structure, explain.

