---
title: 'The definition of differential privacy, explicitly'
date: 2020-10-02
permalink: /posts/2020/10/02/
tags:
  - Math
  - Differential Privacy
  - Privacy
---

---

This is the first part of a series of articles where I attempt to clarify some mathematical notions of differential privacy. 

It serves mainly as a study note for myself, and therefore contains potentially a lot of mistakes and biases ;)

Regarding to learning the math behind differential privacy, I have benefited greatly from reading this [post](https://ypei.me/posts/2019-03-13-a-tail-of-two-densities.html). 

I will try to explain the notions used as detailed as possible, but
do not expect this article to be self-contained. 
Please refer to the original [post](https://ypei.me/posts/2019-03-13-a-tail-of-two-densities.html) for a
more complete description of the topic.

Other useful study materials include:

-   Dwork, Cynthia, and Aaron Roth. "The Algorithmic Foundations of
    Differential Privacy." Foundations and Trends® in Theoretical
    Computer Science 9, no. 3--4 (2013): 211--407.
    <https://doi.org/10.1561/0400000042>.
-   Murtagh, Jack, and Salil Vadhan. "The Complexity of Computing the
    Optimal Composition of Differential Privacy." In Theory of
    Cryptography, edited by Eyal Kushilevitz and Tal Malkin,
    9562:157--75. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2016.
    <https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49096-9_7>.

TLDR
-------------
Clarify the definition of differential privacy regarding to the support.
And Laplace mechanism.

$\epsilon$-dp 
-------------
Following [this notation](https://ypei.me/posts/2019-03-13-a-tail-of-two-densities.html), 
we first define *mechanism* and *distance* between datasets.

**Definition (Mechanisms)**. Let $X$ be a
space with a metric $d: X \times X \to \mathbb N$. A *mechanism* $M$ is
a function that takes $x \in X$ as input and outputs a random variable
on $Y$.

The space of dataset with $m$ instances/rows may be represented by $X = Z^m$, where each instance resides in some space $Z$. The distance
$d(x, x') := \sum_{\{i: x_i \neq x'_i\}} 1$, is the number of rows where $x$ and $x'$ differ.

For the case $d(x, x') = 1$, the notation $x \sim x'$ is also commonly used.

**Definition (Differential
Privacy)**. A mechanism $M$ is called $\epsilon$*-differential privacy*
($\epsilon$-dp) if it satisfies the following condition: for all
$x, x' \in X$ with $x \sim x'$, and for all measureable set
$S \subset \mathbb R^n$,

$$\mathbb P(M(x) \in S) \le e^\epsilon P(M(x') \in S). $$

This is the part that confuses me. This equation looks to me that for any output of $M(x)$ and $M(x')$, even for outputs $M(x) \neq M(x')$, differential privacy is achieved when $\mathbb P(M(x)) \le e^\epsilon P(M(x'))$.

I think that the above interpretation is wrong, and I think it is implicitly assumed that two probabilities should compared on the same support (maybe this is a trivial textbook assumption, but as an uneducated ex-physicist I did not know about it). 
That is, one should always be comparing the probabilities of $M(x)$ and $M(x')$ outputting the same value.

The following, which is a more explicit way of rewriting Equation (1) is more comfortable to me:

**Definition (Differential
Privacy, explicitly)**. A mechanism $M$ is called $\epsilon$*-differential privacy*
($\epsilon$-dp) if it satisfies the following condition: for all
$x, x' \in X$ with $x \sim x'$, and for all measureable set
$S \subset \mathbb R^n$, and for all $r \in S$,

$$\mathbb P(M(x) = r ) \le e^\epsilon P(M(x') = r ). $$

Many references prove that the Laplace mechanism is a differentially private mechanism using Equation (2) implicitly.

Before presenting the Laplace mechanism, we also need the definition of *sensitivity*.

**Definition (Sensitivity)**. Let
$f: X \to \mathbb R^d$ be a function. The *sensitivity* $S_f$ of $f$ is
defined as

$$S_f := \sup_{x, x' \in X: d(x, x') = 1} \|f(x) - f(x')\|_2,$$

where $\|y\|_2 = \sqrt{y_1^2 + ... + y_d^2}$ is the $\ell^2$-norm.

Now we move on to the definition of Laplace distribution.

**Definition**. The *Laplace distribution* over $\mathbb R$
with parameter $b > 0$ has probability density function

$$f_{\text{Lap}(b)}(x) = {1 \over 2 b} e^{- {|x| \over b}}.$$

Finally, Laplace mechanism.

**Definition**. Let $d = 1$. The *Laplace mechanism* is
defined by

$$M(x) = f(x) + \text{Lap}(b).$$

**Claim**. The Laplace mechanism with

$$b \ge \epsilon^{-1} S_f$$

is $\epsilon$-dp.

This is commonly proved by comparing the probabilities of $M(x)$ and $M(x')$ outputting the same value, $y$.

**Proof**. 


$$  {\mathbb P(M(x) = y )\over \mathbb P(M(x') = y ) } = {f_{\text{Lap}(b)} (y - f(x)) \over f_{\text{Lap}(b)} (y - f(x'))} = \exp(b^{-1} (|y - f(x')| - |y - f(x)|))$$

Using triangular inequality $|A| - |B| \le |A - B|$ on the right hand
side, we have

$${\mathbb P(M(x) = y )\over \mathbb P(M(x') = y )} \le \exp(b^{-1} (|f(x) - f(x')|)) \le \exp(\epsilon)$$

where in the last step we use the condition (6). $\square$

TLDR Conclusion 
---------------
Equation (2) is probably correct, and is the explicit way of writing Equation (3).

