---
title: 'Brains and Actions'
date: 2022-09-20
permalink: /posts/2022/1/
tags:
  - brain
  - neuroscience
  - impulses
  - connections
  - nerve system
  - resemblance
  - good habits
---
This post is about how we shape and are being shaped by brains through our actions. 


The reward system of the brain
======
1. Brain reacts and store memories quite well, even without us noticing
2. Large portion of that happens when we are sleeping
3. Those memories and how we allocate rewards to certain actions is largely correlated with immediate reward that is received -> If brain experience more immediate dopamine, it starts creating good memories of the action and our habit-self start to lean in towards those actions
4. When we don't have the sufficient level of mental energy for cognitively demaning tasks, our habits come into play.
5. How we formulate those habits and the usual mode of thinking is where we accumulate difference
6. Fortunately, habits can be formed with repetition and some effort
7. To get rid of the bad habits, we need to block the dopamine systme that is constantly craving for more

1. Until now, I've only approached the field of habits, desires and lifestyles only from philosophical contexts. Wheter we should abstain from certain desires and train our minds and so on.
2. But now I view the issue of habit formation as a more scientific, neurological phenomenan that physically affects how I think, how I behave and how I perform at certain tasks.
3. The key is "the conditioning of oneself and certain contexts/cues that trigger certain habits."
4. In that sense, exercising is really helpful because it creates a sense of rhythm in our lives.
5. Andrew Huberman podcast: there are certain hormones that come about the "burning" feeling during/after exercise that enhances our cognitive abilities.

Here's the thing, I deviate now and then from the task at hand. It's not like I'm flying but I have this constant flow of thoughts flowing into my head that requires me to act instantly upon it. When some new idea or new thought comes by, I'm captivated by it in some sense, and can't stop from exploring that though until I make a conclusion on it.

It could be that, I have lost instant categorizing capabilities, and becasue of that when new thought come by, I postpone the categorizing decision and explore first. It's definitely not a good habit. When new ideas, new thoughts come by, you should try to take a note of it, identify its core properties(urgent, what area, important, why do i need it, etc.) and learn to put it in my queue. Wait for it. Keep it under the hood until the time comes eventually.

<!-- Your brain's been fu**ed quite bad over the last 6 years. -->
------


