---
title: 'Reading List'
date: 2022-12-26
permalink: /posts/2022/12/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - books
---

Some books I enjoyed reading.

Technical
------
***Designing Machine Learning Systems: An Iterative Process for Production-Ready Applications*** by Chip Huyen

***Deep Learning*** by Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bingio, and Aaron Courville

***Ace the Data Science Interview*** by Nick Singh and Kevin Huo

***Transformers for Natural Language Processing*** by Denis Rothman

***Naked Statistics: Stripping the Dread from the Data*** by Charles Wheelan

***Machine Learning System Design Interview*** by Ali Aminian and Alex Xu

***Cracking the PM Interview: How to Land a Product Manager Job in Technology (Cracking the Interview & Career)*** by Gayle Laakmann McDowell and Jackie Bavaro

<p style="font-size:1em;padding-left:30px;"> I find the best instructions for behavior questions in this book.</p>


Biography
------
***A Woman Makes a Plan: Advice for a Lifetime of Adventure, Beauty, and Success*** by Maye Musk 

***Elon Musk: Tesla, SpaceX, and the Quest for a Fantastic Future*** by Ashlee Vance

***When Breath Becomes Air*** by Paul Kalanithi (Author), Abraham Verghese (Foreword)


Self-help
------
***The Making of a Manager: What to Do When Everyone Looks to You*** by Julie Zhou

***Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead*** by Sheryl Sandberg

***Principles: Life and Work*** by Ray Dalio

***The Psychology of Money*** by Morgan Housel

<p style="font-family:Papyrus;font-size:1em;padding-left:30px;">Some people are born into families that encourage educations; others are against it. some are born into flourishing economies encouraging of entrepreneurship; others are born into war and destitution. I want you to be successful, and I want you to earn it. But realize that not all success is due to hard work, and not all poverty is due to laziness. Keep this in mind when judging people, including yourself. </p>

***The Subtle Art Of Not Giving a Fck*** by Mark Manson

<p style="font-family:Papyrus;font-size:1em;padding-left:30px;">What determines your success isn't, "What do you want to enjoy?" The relevant question is, "What pain do you want to sustain?" The path to happiness is a path full of shitheaps and shame.</p>

<p style="font-family:Papyrus;font-size:1em;padding-left:30px;">See: it's a never-ending upward spiral. And if you think at any point you're allowed to stop climbing, I'm afraid you're missing the point. Because the joy is in the climb itself.</p>

***You Are a Badass at Making Money: Master the Mindset of Wealth*** by Jen Sincero

***Nice Girls Don't Get the Corner Office: Unconscious Mistakes Women Make That Sabotage Their Careers (A NICE GIRLS Book)*** by Lois P. Frankel PhD

***How to Not Die Alone: The Surprising Science That Will Help You Find Love*** by Logan Ury

***Atomic Habits: An Easy & Proven Way to Build Good Habits & Break Bad Ones*** by James Clear

***Freakonomics [Revised and Expanded]: A Rogue Economist Explores the Hidden Side of Everything*** by Steven D. Levitt and Stephen J. Dubner


To be continued as time goes on...