---
title: 'My Definition of Fear'
date: 2022-09-30
permalink: /posts/2022/2/
tags:
  - goals
  - essentialism
  - habits
  - uncertainty
  - anxiety
  - probability
  - mindset
---
This post is my memo on how I managed to shape my brain the way I want it.

Endless possiblities. This is exactly we lose our sense of decision-making.
Dealing with uncertainty and the following anxiety.

Fear. It's probably one of the biggest motivators of human.
Fear of losing, death, 
Fear of survival, getting fired
Fear of 

Herein lies one of the greatest engine of humanity: imagining the future according to one's world model and feeling the consequences in advance. 
This is probably also the reason anxiety and fear is deeply seated near the prefrontal cortex.
Well, how do we overcome it? 
The answer is quite simple: we develop a plan/solution to get around the anticipated problems and act on it.
But this raises another question: what if there isn't a plan or the plan that I've come up with doesn't seem to be a good one and doesn't seem to get me there in the time boundary?
When we encouter walls that seem insurmountable, our first response to it is to run away from it or resort to something greater than our being to counter the wall.
Worse, we just choose to surrender and inflict self-harm.
This is where we reinforce the internal mechanism of depression.

More over, anxiety and fear makes us seek easier, cheaper dopamine to erase that overwhelming feeling from memory. It fogs our memeory, our clear view of the situation and thus our decision-making system as a whole.


How do we get away from it?
It boils down to habit, habit and habit.

======
dfs
----

