---
title:  "2023 Year In Review"
date:   2023-12-24 10:00:00 -0700
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - Life
---





My 2023 Year In Review. Here we go.

<h1>Passion</h1>

- I guess I solved 700+ problems this year but contest performances were not up to the mark at all.
- Finally hit the solve count of 2000 in cf, that is I have solved 3000+ problems in my whole CP career.

<h4>2024 Goals:</h4>

- Participate in the next Regional Contest, try to qualify for the next World Finals, and do smth remarkable for the country in the World Finals.
- Try to be good at Adhoc problems and thus be red on Codeforces.
- Be champions in some National Contests.
- Host some Div. 3 or Div. 4 rounds on Codeforces (only if I have time).

<h1>Job</h1>

- Not Now

<h4>2024 Goals:</h4> 

- Write blogs on Codeforces.
- Reply to everyone.
- Have a new live course maybe.
- Stay active on Discord Server.

<h1>Mental Peace</h1>

- Helped with almost all the expenses of my family.
- Gifted my family during Eid.
- Messi win 8th Ballon d'or And Australia won ICC World Cup 2023.

<h4>2024 Goals:</h4> 

- Visit at least 1 new countries(Thailand).
- Make new friends. Hit me up if you want to be a friend of mine.
- Buy gifts for Maa and my family

<h1>Finance</h1>
- Not Interested Share

<h4>2024 Goals:</h4>

- Built an almost dream workstation for me.
- Bought iPhone 15 Pro.

<h1>Health</h1>

- Need improvements!🙂

<h4>2024 Goals:</h4>

- Sleep Early!

Some things went well. Some things didn’t go well. Could have done better. Or maybe that’s how life is? Right?

I have, nevertheless, reconciled with my history. I am happy where I am right now. I'm also enthusiastic about the future. And that's what I hope life will provide.

Have an Awesome New Year everyone!
