---
title: 'Cognitive Unit Tests'
date: 2024-08-16
permalink: /posts/2024/08/cognitive-unit-tests/
author_profile: false
tags:
  - essays
  - cognition
---

This essay introduces the concept of cognitive unit tests.

## Rumination and the prefrontal cortex

The pre-frontal cortex is the newest part of our brain, in evolutionary terms.
It can be considered our greatest tool and separates us from other species.
The pre-frontal cortex allows us to rationalize, to plan and schedule, and to do complex computations.
We can argue whether the whole brain can be considered a computer, but most agree that the pre-frontal cortex can be considered as such.
But this power brings risks with it.
Hence the description of "a useful servant, but a terrible master".
Planning can also bring excessive worrying, and the relatively unique human trait of being able to get stressed or anxious about imagined events (Sapolsky).
Those who do not master this tool can become slaves to it.
Enter the unit test.

## What are unit tests?

Unit tests are a concept from software development.
The idea is to write small tests for particular pieces of the entire computer programme.
For example, let's say we have some complex script that compiles a computes fields in a large data table.
A simple unit test could check whether all expected data columns are present in the table, before passing it on to the next step in the programme.
Unit tests are often written about the steps to be executed as well (i.e. functions).
Let's say we have a function that we know has to return a positive number.
A unit test can then check for positive function outcomes for a range of example inputs.
In modern software development, unit tests are often run every time a code change has been made.
Such a workflow is often referred to as Continuous Integration or Continuous Development (CI or CD).
If we make a change in this particular function, and suddenly it spits out a few negative numbers, a developer can directly see that this respective change may have been wrongly implemented.

Cognition and reasoning in humans often emerges from a collection of such smaller patterns as well.
Defining and testing for common patterns may alert us about flaws in the execution of our thoughts.
I am not talking about the content of thoughts here.
Rather, it is about the way in which we go about reaching the desired outcome and thus how confident we can be about such an outcome.
Everyone knows that we shouldn't believe everything we __hear__ or __read__, but it is harder for many to realise we also shouldn't believe everything we __think__.

## Useful unit tests

So what might such cognitive unit tests look like?
I have compiled a list of ones that can be helpful and which I believe are the most common causes of "programme errors".
Similarly to unit tests in software development, there are no golden standard tests to perform.
Each individual will be more receptive to certain pitfalls, and will have unique tests they will need to define for themselves.
The below unit tests are questions you can ask yourself about a certain belief or idea.
They will help you understand if they are balanced and true.
For each unit test I have included an example situation to apply it in.

1. Am I looping over this idea? Am I progressing? Am I going through the same sequential steps of thoughts and insights, without any new idea? How many times have I gone through the same loop?
  - There is evidence that certain thought patterns strengthening neurophysiological "grooves", reinforcing the same loop
	- According to Einstein, the definition of insanity is to try the same thing, hoping for a different outcome

1. Where am I on the Dunning-Kruger effect curve? It is common for people to overestimate their knowledge of a certain topic. Sub-questions here might include:
	- What do people who have a lot more experience talk about this idea?
	- What have I done to test my idea?

1. Am I making the situation more black and white than it is? We often make things more categorical than they are in reality. Extra categories are expensive (Gershman, Occam's razor). Moreover, such abstract thinking is necessary for complex thought and being able to make decisions in complex environments (Gershman, 2020). However, in certain situations this ability can make things worse. People with depressive conditions often start thinking in extremes, telling themselves they are completely worthless.

1. What is my emotional state now? Is it possible that my thoughts are generated by my emotions? Am I actually angry or just hungry? Would I think differently tomorrow?

1. Are you learning the right thing? Are you solving the right problem?

1. Am I considering all relevant information? Sometimes we focus on information that supports our current beliefs and ignore information that contradicts them. This is known as confirmation bias. Ask yourself:
    - Have I looked for evidence that contradicts my current beliefs?
    - Am I open to changing my mind based on new evidence?

1. Am I overgeneralizing? Overgeneralization is when we make broad conclusions based on limited evidence. Ask yourself:
    - Am I making a sweeping statement based on a single event or piece of evidence?
    - Can I think of exceptions to this generalization?

1. Am I personalizing the situation? Personalization is when we take responsibility for events outside our control. Ask yourself:
    - Am I blaming myself for something that is not entirely my fault?
    - Are there other factors or people involved in this situation?

1. Am I catastrophizing? Catastrophizing is when we expect the worst possible outcome to happen. Ask yourself:
    - Am I predicting a negative outcome without evidence?
    - What is the most likely outcome based on the evidence I have?

1. Am I using emotional reasoning? Emotional reasoning is when we assume that our emotions reflect the truth. Ask yourself:
    - Am I basing my conclusions on how I feel rather than on objective evidence?
    - Can I separate my emotions from the facts of the situation?

## Relevance for mental health

In Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), such cognitive unit tests are commonly applied.
One exercise is about 'reframing' thoughts.

## Further Reading

1. [What Makes Us Smart: The Computational Logic of Human Cognition](https://press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691205717/what-makes-us-smart?srsltid=AfmBOoqHjiBUhdWAD7l6UmadsQasHmKCURdtsuTj6BX-v1XwOh1dgzXr){:target="_blank"}. *Samuel J. Gershman*.
1. [Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers](https://catalogofbias.org){:target="_blank"}. *Robert Sapolsky*.
