---
title: 'Implementing LSD-SLAM, ORB-SLAM2, and LDSO with a custom dataset'
date: 2019-10-24
permalink: /posts/2019/10/slam2019/

---

There many existing visual SLAM benchmark datasets (e.g., EuRoC, TUM, and KITTI) to conduct a quick test of SLAM algorithms. 
However, other than the above three popular datasets, implementing SLAM algorithms with a custom dataset needs some 
configuration work. This is also true for implementing some SLAM algorithms proposed before these datasets, such as 
testing LSD-SLAM with EuRoC and KITTI. 

### LSD-SLAM

---

### ORB-SLAM2

---

### LDSO 
Similar to ORB-SLAM, you can run LDSO algorithm by the provided commands with all three datasets. 
Your custom image dataset should be created similar to the EuRoC dataset.

1. Modify the camera calibration parameters of the “EUROC.txt” in LDSO/examples/EUROC. 
2. Record videos or ROS bag files. 
   * Extract image frames from videos: `ffmpeg -i xxx.mp4 -qscale:v 2 %06d.png`
   * Extract image frames from ROS bags: [rosbag2video](https://github.com/mlaiacker/rosbag2video) 
3. Put all extracted image frames in “data” folder; 
4. Create a “data.csv” containing the timestamp and image filename information: as the same format as the “data.csv” of EuRoC 
dataset. 
5. Run LDSO  with the created dataset: ./bin/run_dso_euroc preset=0 files=/YOURDATASET
   * When the package finished running, the generated points cloud map will be automatically saved as the “pointcloud.ply” 
   file after shutting down the “Pangolin” window. 
   
The created custom dataset should looks like this:
````bash
$YOURDATASET
├── data.csv
├── data
│   ├── 000001.png
│   ├── 000002.png
│   ├── 000003.png
│   ├── ... 
````
