---
title: "Coarse-to-fine Semantic Localization with HD Map for Autonomous
Driving In Structured Scenes"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/7
excerpt: 'vision localization'
date: 2021-03-01
venue: ''
paperurl: 'http://candyguo.github.io/files/10.pdf'

---
Robust and accurate localization is an essential
component for robotic navigation and autonomous driving. The
use of cameras for localization with high definition map (HD
Map) provides an affordable localization sensor set. Existing
methods suffer from pose estimation failure due to error
prone data association or initialization with accurate initial
pose requirement. In this paper, we propose a cost-effective
vehicle localization system with HD map for autonomous
driving that uses cameras as primary sensors. To this end,
we formulate vision-based localization as a data association
problem that maps visual semantics to landmarks in HD map.
Specifically, system initialization is finished in a coarse to
fine manner by combining coarse GPS (Global Positioning
System) measurement and fine pose searching. In tracking
stage, vehicle pose is refined by implicitly aligning the semantic
segmentation result between image and landmarks in HD maps
with photometric consistency. Finally, vehicle pose is computed
by pose graph optimization in a sliding window fashion. We
evaluate our method on two datasets and demonstrate that
the proposed approach yields promising localization results
in different driving scenarios. Additionally, our approach is
suitable for both monocular camera and multi-cameras that
provides flexibility and improves robustness for the localization
system.

[Download paper here](http://candyguo.github.io/files/10.pdf)