---
title: "A Study of the Effectiveness of Transfer Learning in Individualized Asthma Risk Prediction"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-03-22-ACMSAC2021
excerpt: '.'
date: 2021-03-22
venue: 'The 36th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC 2021), Republic of Korea'
paperurl: 'http://markplotlib.github.io/files/ACMSAC2021_MLA_1160_Bae_et_al.pdf'
citation: 'Bae et al., 2021.
&quot;A Study of the Effectiveness of Transfer Learning in Individualized Asthma Risk Prediction.&quot;
<i>ACM Symposium on Applied Computing</i>.'
---

Abstract
------
Deep Learning classifiers require a vast amount of data to train
models that generalize well and perform effectively on unseen data.
However, small sizes of training data, especially in the medical
domain, make this a challenging task. Transfer Learning (TL) can
help overcome a scarcity of data by focusing on fine tuning a pretrained
model with a small amount of specialized training data. In
the last few years, several studies have been performed on TL with
medical images, and they point towards significant gains available
with this method. However, to date no such studies have been
performed in the area of individualized asthma prediction with
limited training data for each patient. In this paper, we conduct a
systematic study of transfer learning in this domain in the context
of neural networks. Our TL approach trains the source model with
population data of 25 asthma patients and then retrains the target
model with a target patient’s data. Our results show that transfer
learning yields promising results in improving model performance
on an individual basis. Further research directions that are worth
investigating based on our results are pointed out as future work
directions.

[Download paper here](http://markplotlib.github.io/files/ACMSAC2021_MLA_1160_Bae_et_al.pdf)

Recommended citation: Bae et al., 2021. "A Study of the Effectiveness
of Transfer Learning in Individualized Asthma Risk Prediction."
 <i>ACM Symposium on Applied Computing</i>.
