---
title: "Integro-partial differential equation models for cell-cell adhesion and its application"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2017-12-14-thesis
excerpt: 'My dissertation on non-local models for cell-cell adhesion.'
date: 2018-06-07
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.7939/R3M902J30'
venue: 'University of Alberta'
citation: 'Buttenschoen, A. (2018). Integro-partial differential equation models for cell-cell adhesion and its application.'
---

**Abstract:** In both health and disease, cells interact with one another through cellular
adhesions. Normal development, wound healing, and metastasis all depend on
these interactions. These phenomena are commonly studied using continuum
models (partial differential equations). However,
a mathematical description of cell adhesion in such tissue models
had remained a challenge until 2006, when
Armstrong et. al. proposed the use of an integro-partial
differential equation (iPDE) model. The initial success of the model was the
replication of the cell-sorting experiments of Steinberg. Since then, this
approach has proven popular in applications to embryogenesis, wound healing,
and cancer cell invasions.

In this thesis, I present a first systematic derivation of non-local
(iPDE) models for adhesive and chemotactic motion. For
this purpose, I develop a framework by which non-local models can be derived
from a space-jump process. I show how the notions of cell motility and cell
polarization can be naturally included. The significance of
such a derivation is that, it allows me to take cell-level properties such
as cell-size, cell protrusion length or adhesion molecule densities into
account. Thus this derivation validates these popular non-local models.
I show that particular choices of these properties yield the original
Armstrong cell-cell adhesion model. Finally, I extend the cell adhesion
model to include volume exclusion, and complex cell adhesion molecule
kinetics.

In Chapter 3, I present a first in depth
analytical study of the steady-states of the non-local cell adhesion model
derived in this thesis. The importance of steady states is that these are
the patterns observed in nature and tissues (e.g. cell-sorting experiments).
As a prerequisite to the subsequent analysis, I present an in depth study of
the properties of the non-local cell adhesion operator. I present results on
its continuity, compactness, and spectral properties. I then
combine bifurcation techniques pioneered by Rabinowitz,
equivariant bifurcation theory, and the properties of the equation's
solution, to obtain the existence of an unbounded bifurcation branch of
non-homogeneous solutions. Using the equation's symmetries,
I further classify the solution branches by the derivative's number of zeros
(i.e., number of extrema remains fixed). Significantly, this parallels
the classifications of solutions of nonlinear Sturm-Liouville problems and
equivariant nonlinear elliptic equations. I identify the bifurcation type as
pitchfork, and show that integration kernel in the non-local term determines
whether an immediate switch in the solution's stability takes places.
Finally, using numerical techniques, I verify my analysis, and demonstrate
the existence of rotating waves of steady states.

In the final chapter, I extend the non-local cell adhesion model to a
bounded domain with no-flux boundary conditions. In the past, boundary
conditions for non-local equations were avoided, because their construction
is subtle. I encounter three challenges: (1) ensure the non-local operator
is well-defined near the boundary, (2) ensure that the non-local operator
satisfies the no-flux boundary conditions, and (3) the constructed non-local
operators are non-unique in the boundary region. I address the first
challenge by introducing spatially dependent integration limits. While more
complicated, the new non-local operators share many of their mathematical
properties with the periodic non-local operator. However, the spatial
dependence of the integration limits complicates differentiation. Indeed,
the theory of distributions must be used, to compute the non-local
operator's weak derivative. Using the model's derivation,
I ensure that the constructed operators satisfy the no-flux
boundary conditions. Finally, I classify the constructed non-local
operators, by comparing their action to the periodic non-local adhesion
operator, into either repellent, neutral, or attractive. It is however, an
open problem to match these newly constructed non-local operators to cell
behaviour near physical boundaries.

This publication is part of the [Non-local models of cell-cell adhesion project.](/portfolio/2018-01-01-adhesion)

[Download my thesis here](https://doi.org/10.7939/R3M902J30)
