---
title: "X-ray afterglows of short gamma-ray bursts: Magnetar or fireball?"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/bilby
excerpt: 'A Bayesian inference library and code'
date: 2018-11-7
venue: 'ApJS'
paperurl: 'Submitted'
contribution: I contributed to the development of Bilby, in particular to Gaussian Noise and
citation: 'Ashton et al. 2018'
---

Bayesian parameter estimation is fast becoming the language of gravitational-wave astronomy. It is the method by which gravitational-wave data is used to infer the sources' astrophysical properties. We introduce a user-friendly Bayesian inference library for gravitational-wave astronomy, Bilby. This python code provides expert-level parameter estimation infrastructure with straightforward syntax and tools that facilitate use by beginners. It allows users to perform accurate and reliable gravitational-wave parameter estimation on both real, freely-available data from LIGO/Virgo, and simulated data. We provide a suite of examples for the analysis of compact binary mergers and other types of signal model including supernovae and the remnants of binary neutron star mergers. These examples illustrate how to change the signal model, how to implement new likelihood functions, and how to add new detectors. Bilby has additional functionality to do population studies using hierarchical Bayesian modelling. We provide an example in which we infer the shape of the black hole mass distribution from an ensemble of observations of binary black hole mergers.

[Code available here](https://git.ligo.org/lscsoft/bilby)
[Download paper here](http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018arXiv181102042A)
