---
title: "Verifying Generalization in Deep Learning"
collection: publications
permalink: /fpv/paper6
Authors: 'Guy Amir, Osher Maayan, Tom Zelazny, Guy Katz, Michael Schapira'
venue: 'International Conference on Computer Aided Verification'
---
Abstract: Deep neural networks (DNNs) are the workhorses of deep
learning, which constitutes the state of the art in numerous application
domains. However, DNN-based decision rules are notoriously prone to
poor generalization, i.e., may prove inadequate on inputs not encountered
during training. This limitation poses a significant obstacle to employing
deep learning for mission-critical tasks, and also in real-world environments
that exhibit high variability. We propose a novel, verificationdriven
methodology for identifying DNN-based decision rules that generalize
well to new input domains. Our approach quantifies generalization
to an input domain by the extent to which decisions reached by independently
trained DNNs are in agreement for inputs in this domain. We
show how, by harnessing the power of DNN verification, our approach
can be efficiently and effectively realized. We evaluate our verificationbased
approach on three deep reinforcement learning (DRL) benchmarks,
including a system for Internet congestion control. Our results establish
the usefulness of our approach. More broadly, our work puts forth a
novel objective for formal verification, with the potential for mitigating
the risks associated with deploying DNN-based systems in the wild.

[Download paper here](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-37703-7_21)