---
title: "HIGH-PRECISION ATTITUDE ESTIMATION METHOD OF STAR SENSORS AND
GYRO BASED ON COMPLEMENTARY FILTER AND UNSCENTED KALMAN FILTER"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/5
excerpt: 'The paper proposes an on-orbit attitude estimation method of star sensors and gyro
based on Complementary Filter (CF) and Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF).'
date: 2017-07-01
venue: '2017 International Symposium on Planetary Remote Sensing and Mapping'
paperurl: 'http://candyguo.github.io/files/5.pdf'

---
Determining the attitude of satellite at the time of imaging then establishing the mathematical relationship between image points and ground points is essential in high-resolution remote sensing image mapping. Star tracker is insensitive to the high frequency attitude variation due to the measure noise and satellite jitter, but the low frequency attitude motion can be determined with high accuracy. Gyro, as a short-term reference to the satellite’s attitude, is sensitive to high frequency attitude change, but due to the existence of gyro drift and integral error, the attitude determination error increases with time. Based on the opposite noise frequency characteristics of two kinds of attitude sensors, this paper proposes an on-orbit attitude estimation method of star sensors and gyro based on Complementary Filter (CF) and Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF). In this study, the principle and implementation of the proposed method are described. First, gyro attitude quaternions are acquired based on the attitude kinematics equation. An attitude information fusion method is then introduced, which applies high-pass filtering and low-pass filtering to the gyro and star tracker, respectively. Second, the attitude fusion data based on CF are introduced as the observed values of UKF system in the process of measurement updating. The accuracy and effectiveness of the method are validated based on the simulated sensors attitude data. The obtained results indicate that the proposed method can suppress the gyro drift and measure noise of attitude sensors, improving the accuracy of the attitude determination significantly, comparing with the simulated on-orbit attitude and the attitude estimation results of the UKF defined by the same simulation parameters.

[Download paper here](http://candyguo.github.io/files/5.pdf)