---
title: "Why Discussion Rules Matter for Representation: Experimental Evidence from Rural India"
collection: publications
--
With [Rachel Brulé](https://rachelbrule.com/) and [Simon Chauchard](https://www.simonchauchard.com/). Contact for pre-analysis plan (registered with EGAP.) Data collection still in progress. 

Research on representative democracy often assumes that elected officials from disadvantaged and dominant groups are equally influential once in office. Drawing on an original survey in 600 Indian village councils, we 1) leverage both reputational measures and behavioral observations to show that this assumption does not hold, and 2) Implement an intervention to alleviate the gender gap in influence detected in 1. In the first part of the paper, we rely on an array of objective and subjective indicators to show that female village council presidents (sarpanches) elected through gender quotas do not equally affect decision-making in village councils after their election. Analyses suggest that this gender disadvantage can be magnified or mitigated by inequalities on other identity dimensions. This suggests that reforms aiming to increase the representation of members of disadvantaged groups (e.g. quotas) may not alone suffice to enable individuals from traditionally excluded groups to affect policy. Taking stock of this, the second part of the paper investigates whether changes in formal rules of discussion, in a standardized version of local village council meetings, can increase the influence that female officials have in a collective decision-making process. Practically, we randomly vary the rules of the discussion in which the group deliberates about and decides upon budgetary priorities. The two versions of our interventions require sarpanches, in the context of a group decision-making process (where the village council’s preferences have to be recorded, alongside a close observation of the deliberative process) to either speak first (T1) or last (T2). We compare the effect of these interventions (both jointly and separately) to a control condition in which no specific discussion rule is ex-ante specified. We argue that minor changes in formal discussion rules may alter engagement of elected leaders in decision making processes. We also hypothesize that changes in formal discussion rules affect the responsiveness of peers to the substantive input of elected leaders, both in public (based on the outcomes and process of decision-making) and in private (by moving the private preferences of other institutional actors).
