---
type: 'journal'
title: "Eye Movements during Sentence Processing in High-Functioning Autistic Children Compared to Neurotypical Peers: An Eye Tracking Study"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/p001
date: 2023-08-28
venue: 'Cognitive Neuroscience'
paperurl: 'https://bcn.iums.ac.ir/article-1-2753-en.pdf'
authors: '<b>Ramin Toosi</b>, Sadaf Salehkalaibar, Mohammad Ali Akhaee'
---

<h3> Authors </h3>
Faezeh Dehghan, Mehdi Alizadeh Zarei, Reza Khosro Abadi, Hashem Farhangdost, <b>Amirali Soltani Tehrani</b>, Mohamad Taghi Joghati 

<h3> Abstract </h3>
<b>Background</b>: Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder. The pattern of
eye movements during reading can significantly impact reading quality. This study aimed to
examine the eye movement patterns, which are essential for reading, in children with ASD as
compared to their neurotypical peers.
<b>Methods</b>: This study focused on two crucial indicators that influence reading: eye fixation time
and saccade movement. Comparison of parameters of saccade movements and eye fixation in a
sentence reading task was done between two groups using an eye tracker device. autistic chidren
(15 children, average age: 102.33months) and their neurotypical peers (17 children, average age:
101.69 months) participated in this study.
<b>Results</b>: The results showed that compared to their neurotypical peers, children with ASD have
lower amplitude while reading sentences (P.Value : 0.02).These children used more number of
fixations to read the words in the sentence (P.Value : 0.02). Comparing the total time spent to
read a sentence between the two groups shows that autistic children need more time to read a
sentence (P.Value : 0.02).
<b>Discussion</b>: these results suggest that low-level sensorimotor processes involved in generating
accurate eye movements such as dorsal visual pathway and cerebellum can significantly impact
the reading quality of children with ASD