title: "Trimeric photosystem I facilitates energy transfer from phycobilisomes in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803."
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/PMID-35302607
date: 2022 Jun 1
venue: 'Plant physiology'
pubtype: 'journal'
authors: 'Akhtar P, Biswas A, Balog-Vig F, Domonkos I, Kovacs L, Lambrev PH'
excerpt_separator: ""
---

### Abstract
In cyanobacteria, phycobilisomes (PBS) serve as peripheral light-harvesting complexes of the two photosystems, extending their antenna size and the wavelength range of photons available for photosynthesis. The abundance of PBS, the number of phycobiliproteins they contain, and their light-harvesting function are dynamically adjusted in response to the physiological conditions. PBS are also thought to be involved in state transitions that maintain the excitation balance between the two photosystems. Unlike its eukaryotic counterpart, PSI is trimeric in many cyanobacterial species and the physiological significance of this is not well understood. Here, we compared the composition and light-harvesting function of PBS in cells of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, which has primarily trimeric PSI, and the DeltapsaL mutant, which lacks the PsaL subunit of PSI and is unable to form trimers. We also investigated a mutant additionally lacking the PsaJ and PsaF subunits of PSI. Both strains with monomeric PSI accumulated significantly more allophycocyanin per chlorophyll, indicating higher abundance of PBS. On the other hand, a higher phycocyanin:allophycocyanin ratio in the wild type suggests larger PBS or the presence of APC-less PBS (CpcL-type) that are not assembled in cells with monomeric PSI. Steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy at room temperature and 77 K revealed that PSII receives more energy from the PBS at the expense of PSI in cells with monomeric PSI, regardless of the presence of PsaF. Taken together, these results show that the oligomeric state of PSI impacts the excitation energy flow in Synechocystis.

DOI : 
https://doi.org/10.1093/plphys/kiac130 [doi]

PubchemID : 
35302607

