---
title: "Evaluating the Mapping Quality of Monocular SLAM Solutions for Micro Aerial Vehicles"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/slam2019
date: 2019-10-1
venue: 'International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences (ISPRS Archives)'
---

[[Draft Paper]](https://jwangjie.github.io/publications/publications/slam2019.pdf)
[[Video]](https://jwangjie.github.io/files/slam2019.gif)

## Abstract

Monocular simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) has attracted much attention in mobile-robotics domain over the past decade along with the advancements of small-format, consumer-grade digital cameras. This is especially the case for micro air vehicles (MAV) due to their payload and power limitations. The quality of global 3D reconstruction by SLAM solutions is a critical factor in occupancy-grid mapping, obstacle avoidance and map representation. Although several benchmarks have been created in the past to evaluate the quality of vision-based localization and trajectory-estimation, the quality of mapping products have been rarely studied. This paper evaluates the quality of three state-of-the-art open-source monocular SLAM solutions including LSD-SLAM, ORB-SLAM and LDSO in terms of the geometry accuracy of the global mapping. Since there are no ground-truth information of the testing environment in existing visual SLAM benchmark datasets (e.g. EuRoC, TUM and KITTI), in this study an evaluation dataset using a quadcopter and a terrestrial laser scanner is created. The dataset is composed of the image data extracted from the recorded videos by flying a drone in the test environment and the high-fidelity point clouds of the test area acquired by a terrestrial laser scanner as the ground truth reference. The mapping quality evaluation of the three SLAM solutions was mainly conducted on geometry accuracy comparisons by calculating the deviation distance between each SLAM-derived point clouds and the laser scanned reference. The mapping quality was also discussed with respect to their noise levels as well as further applications.
