---
title: 'Broader Impacts--Personal Statement'
date: 2012-08-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2
---
Economics is fascinating because it is all about understanding the world around us--even when it seems impossible. I remember being taught about the sunk cost fallacy and feeling as though I'd had a revelation. I also remember Dr. Melissa Kearney talking about her research into Sesame Street and Teen Mom. I love economics because it is such a broad field if you want it to be. I know that I will never be bored studying economics. I also love economics because I know that I can use it to help people. If I analyze public policy, I can make recommendations to policy makers for how to have the greatest positive impact. Or I can call out policy makers for the negative impact, intention or unintentional, that their actions are having. If I study development economics, I can do experiments that can help to define the growth and evolution of a country's economy. I can help to bring stability to nations that suffer from famine. And once I am a professor, I can also inspire the next generation of economists to pursue the profession while I do my research. One of my biggest regrets is that I did not discover economics sooner. I want to bring economics courses to high schools, starting with my alma mater. I believe a basic economic training at a younger age will empower the next generation and generations to come. I aspire to be the student mentor for the PADE program at the university of Maryland during my time as a graduate student, and then to go on to start a PADE program in the economics department of whichever school I work at. I believe networking with other economics who are pushing for positive social change will be beneficial, and I intend to attend as many conferences and events hosted by groups such as the AEA in order to get exposure to the work being done and to make those connections. In addition to all the social aspects of my development, I believe it is crucial to stay current on the research and the technology both in your field and in the related fields. That is why as a part of my development plan I am including attending computer science/data science conferences and continuing to take courses formally and informally in order to remain on the cutting edge of technology.


Intellectual Merit:
In the spring of 2014, I graduated with two degrees, a Bachelor of Science in Economics and a Bachelor of Art in Studio Art. While it might be hard to believe, these two topics are much closer related than they seem on the surface. Art and economics are both fundamentally invested in understanding people and how they make decisions --which is what drew me in to both. My first introduction to research was on a capstone project for my honors college. I set out to understand the human experience of beauty, and I pursued it through a survey focused on pinpointing individual feature characteristics that were deemed attractive. I designed and worked the survey, and I performed the analysis at the end. I also created a poster and presented it at an on campus undergraduate research fair. The main things that I learned from this experience are the importance of a sound survey methodology, a representative sample for the population you wish to extrapolate to, and the power of econometrics. This project is what began my interest in research, but it also sparked an interest in design theory. Direct from the research, I discovered a lot about the way people experience aesthetic beauty, which leads to lessons learned in design for nearly every aspect of our lives, and I tried to incorporate those lessons into my presentation. I'm still fascinated with understanding people, but I know now that in order to engage a broader audience with my material, it must be aesthetically appealing. Which might not always be a straightforward concept. I have also been a research assistant twice. The first occasion was for a graduate student who was doing research around the impact of pressure from foreign students applying on native student's chances of admission at Ivy League Institutions. My role was in data collection and cleaning for SAT information. I was also able to provide valuable insight--the graduate student was a Chinese student who was mostly unfamiliar with the differences in applying to schools in the united states. I was able to help explain why the data was sparse in the Midwest and suggest the addition of ACT data in order to fill the gap. Given the prevalence of the ACT in midwestern states. My second research assistant position was for Dr. Peter Murrell, a profession in the economics department at UMD. His research was focused around the impact of judge's rulings on the evolution of parliamentary vocabulary. This position was more of a challenge because of the historical data. I collected birth and death dates for judges in England between 1500 and 1800. The data was a challenge because some of it was scraped from original documents incorrectly and matching the correct judge to the correct lineage through the courts was a challenge, especially as some father son pairs were both judges with the same names. His research, recently published, was able to show that a decision made by a judge could travel through x number of years and have x impact. This experience really taught me about the importance of clean data, and the pitfalls of not being careful. It was also my first opportunity to experience an in-depth research project from nearly start to finish, with a rigorous methodology. My most recent research has been in my position at Fannie Mae and in my free time. I am working on gathering a historical view of the recessions over the last 75 years. I want to understand the complex relationships between various macroeconomic drivers and how they can be used to better understand our economy. For example, in the most recent recession in 2008, we saw a spike in home prices, and then a rapid decline as unemployment rose. Interestingly, for previous recessions such as the 1957 recession, home prices barely changed, or only slightly decreased. With a broader picture of the overall impacts of these drivers on the economy, one can begin to form a narrative of how they may be causal or simply a piece of the puzzle. The only other thing I can think to talk about is my exploration with neural networks. I think they are fascinating and can provide boosts in performance in areas we typically haven't done much work in. I'm interested in using it in the pre-processing phase to label mislabeled and unlabeled data.



Broader Impacts:
During my undergraduate career, I was very involved with the Economics Association at Maryland (EAM. During my sophomore year, I was named Director of Tutoring, and in that role, I recruited 6 of my peers to serve as tutors and lead tutoring sessions for over 500 students in the introductory micro and macro economics courses. I then served as the Vice President and continued to be a tutor under the new director of tutoring for the rest of my time at Maryland. As vice president, I was able to be much more involved with the student outreach. I planned multiple career exploration events with recruiters and previous graduates from Maryland designed to help undergraduate students to figure out their post-graduation options. The most fulfilling event that I was able to plan was our Maryland Day booth. During Maryland day, the university opens its doors to the local communities to celebrate Maryland and show off all the work being done by the groups on campus. As the face of the Economics Department, I taught kids and adults alike about the power of risk aversion in a candy coin toss lottery. It was always fun and exciting to see people engage with the material and show that economics can be applied to nearly everything. 
Throughout my involvement with the Economics Association, I discovered the Promoting Achievement and Diversity in Economics fellowship (PADE), run by Dr. Jessica Goldberg. The fellowship is designed to help students from groups underrepresented in Economics to succeed in their classes and possibly pursue a career in Economics. In this fellowship I had the opportunity to learn more about the research around Economics, built confidence in my graduate plans, and help my peers also in the program. In our weekly meetings with the grad student mentor, we studied for classes, worked on projects and applications, and discussed economic research papers. It was a great chance to engage in mutual peer mentoring and to build a support network that continues to this day. 
Since graduating, I have continued my involvement with helping my local community, although now that community is Washington, DC. I am on the board of the Young Professional’s Employee Resource Group at Fannie Mae and in this role, I have planned several volunteer events (SERVE Events) for our 250 + members. We have had several events making snack bags for Martha’s table and toiletry kits for Friendship Place, two nonprofits focused providing support to those less fortunate. I have also participated in other SERVE events including making blankets and emergency kits for those impacted by natural disaster, making and serving holiday meals to the homeless, and I am signed up for the November trip to Puerto Rico to rebuild homes impacted by hurricane Maria.
