---
title: "Tutorial 1 on Relevant Topic in Your Field"
collection: talks
type: "Tutorial"
permalink: /talks/2013-03-01-tutorial-1
venue: "UC-Berkeley Institute for Testing Science"
date: 2013-03-01
location: "Berkeley CA, USA"
---

[More information here](http://exampleurl.com)

This is a description of your tutorial, note the different field in type. This is a markdown files that can be all markdown-ified like any other post. Yay markdown!

The leading cause of mortgage default is inability to pay. 
https://www.minneapolisfed.org/research/economic-policy-papers/who-defaults-on-their-mortgage-and-why-policy-implications-for-reducing-mortgage-default
Homeownership is an integral part of the American Dream, and yet low income American’s homeownership rates are 30 percentage points lower than their wealthier counterparts. 
According to Fannie Mae: “HomeReady mortgage homeownership education requirement is designed to help borrowers gain essential knowledge to prepare for sustainable homeownership and lenders gain informed borrowers prepared to successfully navigate the loan process.”
Proposal Summary: HomeReady® Mortgages
The HomeReady is Fannie Mae’s frontier, landmark, affordable mortgage product. A household is eligible if their income is at or below 80% of their area’s median income (AMI) and if at least one borrower has completed homebuyer education.  Homebuyer education has mostly been studied through down payment assistance programs; however, the HomeReady program is unique in that there are caps on loan level price adjustments (LLPA). Mortgage lenders can pass on the benefit of reduced LLPA by giving borrowers a better rate, or they can keep the difference as profit. HomeReady has been a program since December 2015. 
The effects of Homebuyer Education have been studied through down payment assistance programs, but the impact of Homebuyer education with varying levels of financial assistance have not been evaluated. 
I propose evaluating the effect of 
