---
title: Gendered experiences at a male-dominated conference
permalink: /posts/2018/05/gender-conference-experience
date: 2018-05-13
tags:
    - diversity
    - coding
    - gender
---

As a bio*engineer, I've been fortunate to be spared from the majority of the consequences resulting from gender inequality in STEM.
I've actually rarely been in spaces where women were outnumbered more than 2 to 1 - my undergrad major was probably something like 60% women, my graduate cohort is about 50-50, and although our faculty are only about 20% women, I'm never in spaces exclusively with faculty (there's always more junior people to help increase the proportion).
Last week, I attended a workshop focused on developing software for a popular bioinformatics platform in my field, which is a space that is much more skewed toward men (partially because it's got a lot of computer scientists, and partially because the first few core developers were all men).
It was an interesting experience, and overall incredibly positive.
However, it wasn't perfect, and these non-perfect experiences (1) could have gone way worse than they actually did and (2) illustrated that fixing systemic issues is a marathon that we'll need to keep working on constantly for a very long time to come.

(Note: I'm not using names here because I know how the internet can take things out of context and distort stories and facts.
I've had nothing but positive experiences developing for and meeting this community (given, you know, society as a prior).
The point of my story is not the specific people involved, the point is that it could be about anyone at all.)

I got involved with developing for this software when the person leading the project emailed my co-author to ask him if he was interested in putting our method into their platform.
My co-author said he probably didn't have the bandwidth or coding chops, but asked me if I wanted to do it.
(Side note: yet another example of [sponsorship (in addition to simple mentorship)](https://larahogan.me/blog/what-sponsorship-looks-like/) from this postdoc, who is truly  an amazing mentor/sponsor/human being.)
It seemed like a great opportunity to get our method out to more people, and the fact that the project lead was asking for it made me really confident that this was even wanted!

But right from the start, I was already aware of the gender imbalance.
When I decided to start contributing to this project, I was incredibly intimidated to be starting from scratch and didn't really feel comfortable asking for help.
I looked through work from other developers and found (what seemed like) the only other woman developing in this space
For some reason, looking through her code and not understanding things didn't make me feel like total shit, but I think looking through a man's code would have (*oh hi stereotype threat how's it going?*).
Only after I'd made significant progress did I feel comfortable posting on the help forum with my questions.
This was after ~10 hours of looking around others' code and trying things, and in spite of there being no documentation for developers (it's a very new project).

That said, the responses I got from the moderators were super supportive, enthusiastic, and encouraging!
They made me want to keep going with my work, and more importantly made me feel like a valuable contributor to the community.
The things that made their responses so positive were: lots of exclamation points, recognition of their failures (i.e. total lack of documentation, lol), gratitude for the work I'd already done, and liberal use of emojis.
In short, they were super happy to have me there and they made it known!
(When I met them in person at the conference, I conveyed this to them and they laughed - they were so used to fielding questions from users who know very little coding that they were excited to have someone *new* who also cared about coding to talk to!)

I then received an email

Conference itself was probably 30% female-presenting, which is pretty good.

Oh, wait - speakers also reflected the diversity of the group... But at least it wasn't zero? 3 speakers out of 11 were women... Not sure if it was explicitly prioritized by the organizers or not, but was happy to see at least a mix. Next time, more!

Dinner incident
- I instinctively buried it, because I expect that from his sort of demographic and know well enough than to start something (and be labeled aggressive, bitchy, etc).
The danger of speaking up and not being backed up has been so great up until this point that this is a behavior I still really need to unlearn.
- That said, impact was minimal: I know I'm the shit. I don't need him.
- And retrospective reflection: I automatically braced myself for a different (less pleasant/interesting) conversation as soon as he entered. Mostly because he's famous/very senior, but also partially cuz he's an old(er) white dude. And I realize that I try to get out of those conversations pretty ASAP whenever I get into them. How has that affected my networking, I wonder? How many women have strong networks of peers, but few senior mentors who know them because of these internalized, automatic social behaviors and dynamics?

Post-incident: postdoc spoke-up right after. Was so crucial: even though we both panicked and froze up, to have him acknowledge that (1) it happened and (2) it was totally not okay was HUGE. Like I said, I'd almost already erased it from my memory by then - as a defensive mechanism. So to have him, in that moment, explicitly call it out and make it real prevented me from ever in the future wondering whether it even happened ("am I crazy?") and whether it mattered ("am I overreacting? Did it matter?")

Next day: intermediately senior person brought it up too. Again, not the ideal reaction but still really important and powerful. In that moment, I felt so supported. This is a community that, though imperfect, does value its members. Especially liked his point: "what that dude should do is learn about your work and respect you. So if he won't, I will. And so far, I'm super impressed!" The lesson: if you can't make things better in the moment, you can still make the world better. Also lol cuz I don't know very much about this guy.

And in general, the community was overall very supportive. Other than that, didn't notice any gender-related microaggressions (though who knows what else I'm overlooking...) Very much felt respected and valued by the community - people's contributions (both actual and potential) were truly the most important thing. Really wonderful!

Finally, all of this would have gone down so differently if I were a more junior, less confident, and less accomplished student. So that's the only caveat - but in any case, any response is better than no response. And for now, I need to start thinking about to respond when this happens again (because it will).


This is just one story - it's not glamorous, and no one is clearly in the right or wrong. But that's the point. These are the stories that need to get told for those of us who aren't explicit harassers or discriminators to recognize and change the issues.
