---
title:  "Ultimate frisbee as a tool for social change"
permalink: /posts/2019/10/cambodia-frisbee
date: 2019-10-28
tags:
    - frisbee
---

In undergrad, I had played ultimate during my semester abroad in Australia, but had never been able to find time to fully commit to it back at my home university. However, after spending a gap year living and working (and playing ultimate!) in Cambodia, I knew that I wanted ultimate frisbee to be at the top of my priorities list for grad school. In Phnom Penh, I played with older expats who would bring their kids to pickup as well as tourists travelling through for just a few days. My middle-aged teammates would consistently not only out-play but also out-party 23-year-old me – this, I decided, was a sport I’d be happy to commit to well into my adult life. I traveled to tournaments around Southeast Asia where I was automatically welcomed into an incredible community that I knew would exist anywhere I went in the world. But more important and motivating than the pleasures that playing ultimate gave me, I also saw firsthand its power to transform local communities.

In Phnom Penh, there was a growing group of local Khmer boys from poor neighborhoods who had joined the expat-dominated ultimate frisbee scene. They had been introduced to the sport through a summer camp run by a Seattle-based nonprofit called the Youth Ultimate Project, and had decided to stick with the sport in between the camps. Throughout the year, I watched them grow from immature, hot-headed players into skilled and thoughtful athletes. Their English skills skyrocketed from their constant exposure to foreigners, and their leadership skills bloomed as we passed on the responsibilities of mentoring the younger players and leading practices. Meanwhile, a Peace Corps Volunteer in nearby Kampong Cham was working her frisbee magic with a group of young women. We hosted a few joint clinics between the Phnom Penh and Kampong Cham ultimate players, and these two days of leading drills and coaching the Khmer players were among my favorite in the whole year. In Cambodia, women are expected to be quiet, modest, and most importantly, good wives. They are not expected to sprint and yell and dive after flying discs—but these girls in Kampong Cham did. Watching them play was a joy on so many levels: their enthusiasm was infectious, and the social implications of these women out-playing their male counterparts gave me chills. I saw how women excelling at non-traditional activities like sport can pave the way for a more equal society, and noticed a fascinating parallel in my own life: as a woman in STEM, I had never doubted the technical ability and equality of women.

In Cambodia, I realized that supporting women’s sports and supporting women in STEM weren’t actually all that different – both empower women to kick ass and succeed in areas where they’re not traditionally expected to. For this reason especially, I’m excited to continue to play ultimate – maybe one day I’ll even go back to Cambodia and see what’s become of the women in Kampong Cham. My guess is that they’ll have kicked the boys off of the soccer fields completely and inspired a generation of new women leaders. On sMITe, I’m excited to mentor the younger players to grow into strong, independent women (who also happen to be good at math and science AND catching frisbees). I’m also excited to improve my own skills, stay healthy and active, and maybe even go back to Asia for a few more tournaments someday.
