---
title:  "How to find a job post-PhD"
permalink: /posts/2019/08/phd-job-search
date: 2018-08-18
tags:
    - phd
---

As a [conflict management coach](www.berefs.com) during my PhD, I performed a lot of exit interviews on graduating students. One thing that came up over and over was that finding a job was the most stressful part of the graduating process, and among the most stressful in the entire PhD. I graduated earlier this year, and ended up not experience that stress but instead having a pretty convoluted path to finding my job. While stressful at times, it uncovered one option for finding a post-PhD job that I'd never really heard discussed, and which I think is really valuable to consider. This post is about that option.

From my exit interviews of graduating students, I learned about the two most common strategies for figuring out your post-PhD (non-academic) career:

1. Figure out what you want to do and find a job, while also frantically finishing up your thesis. This was a very common refrain from my peers, and was also the worst one to deal with. Figuring out what you want to do is a pretty heavy existential activity, and piling that on top of the stress of finishing up is really tough (especially if you still have experiments or papers to wrap up, and/or you are deep in conflict with your advisor about graduating). Even if you have a clear and easy path to your defense, there are still a lot of other psychological things that happen during the defense process, and trying to do this serious soul-searching on top of that really takes a toll.

2. Plan to stay on as postdocs in your lab after you finish, allowing you to wrap up your PhD work and poke around for jobs more leisurely. While this works out for a lot of people, it also isn't always the best option to have to rely on. If you don't have a good relationship with your PI, you might risk feeling -- or getting -- "trapped" until you've gone through even more of their hoops. And even if you do have a great relationship with your PI, maybe you're just really over grad school. Staying on in the same environment for any longer might burn you out or demotivate you to the point that you won't be productive or motivated to advance your career. And let's be honest: being a postdoc is a pay bump from grad school, but really doesn't match your true earning potential.

In my case, when it was my turn to graduate, I had lucked out and all but secured an offer from a former labmate to join her [startup](www.biobot.io) in a position that was basically my dream job, so I didn't really go through a legit job search before my defense. But then, a few months into my post-PhD travels, the job offer became less certain and I had to get back on the job market. That's when I discovered a third option no one ever talks about:

3. Line up a part-time and/or consulting gig after your PhD, and use that well-paid and flexible time to figure out what's next. It turns out it's totally possible to find companies excited to hire part-time PhDs -- either because they aren't at a place to hire someone full-time, or because they hope that they'll be able to convert you into a full-time hire if it all goes well. With this route, you might even find a position where you get paid close to the same amount as you were as grad student, and have 20 hours per week to work on your job search. This gives you the room to really explore and think about what you want to do next, without the added pressure of also trying to finish your PhD. Plus, you'll gain new skills, build your network, and get a fresh perspective away from MIT.

In my case, the original job offer actually ended up working out after all, so I didn't end up following through on any of my short-term options. But I found this third option so amazing: as soon as I realized that finding a short-term consulting gig while figuring things out was a viable option, all of my stress about finding a job disappeared. And I was so amazed that no one ever talks about it, so I've been sharing it with all of my peers who are approaching graduation.

That said, I recognize that I speak from a huge place of privilege, and that this option is not available to everybody. Depending on your situation, it might not be possible to go this route because of visa concerns, health insurance requirements, or financial constraints outside of the PhD. I also had a very specific skill set and field of study that is in high demand, and so I certainly have a rosy view of how "easy" it is to get these positions.

However, I do think there are some things I (unknowingly) did during my PhD that led to me finding this third option as a really viable one. If you're interested in potentially pursuing the short-term gig route, here's what I think might be helpful:

**Build a specific skillset that someone can hire you for, and which allows you to get Something Done Now.** It could be a technique that _only you_ knows how to do, or a specific tool or assay that you know companies need someone to be able to do ASAP. For example, I imagine some biological assays might be in high demand, or being able to use very specialized tools. I've also had friends consult for companies to help them design or review experiments that they have deep expertise doing from their PhD projects.

Your skillset could also be something broader like data science or software development, which you might be able to convince a company to contract out to you. That said, if you're marketing your broad skillset, I imagine it's still easier to find positions where you're being asked to do something directly related to your thesis. In my case, this skillset was microbiome data analysis. I was confident I could find consulting work in the microbiome field, and the job offer I secured was more also very directly related to my expertise in computational biology.

**During your PhD, build and think about your network with an eye toward the future and toward consulting.** I never really understood networking, and didn't particularly try at it during my PhD because I never knew what I "wanted" out of the people I was networking with. Turns out that networking just means "get to know and become friendly with lots of people" so that you can reach out to them later when you _do_ know what you want. And it also turned out that I _had_ done that through my PhD: by being president of the microbiome club, organizing a conference, being active on Twitter, and just generally getting to know my department and scientific community.

When my job offer fell through, I had two companies I was fairly confident I could send one email to and have a consulting job the next week. One was my PI's company, and one was a competitor whose CEO I'd met at multiple conferences and who I keep up with via Twitter. If your PI has a company, make sure you get to know what they're doing, who they are (beyond just your PI), and set the stage for joining them as a consultant. If you interact with companies throughout your PhD, float the idea of consulting after your graduate regardless of how far away from graduating you are. Internships aren't really an option during grad school and many PIs don't support consulting on the side, but there's no rule against consulting for interested companies as soon as you graduate and no one can stop you!

**Broadcast your availability to everyone (AKA be loud and desperate).** I came back for Commencement week, mentioned that I was suddenly surprisingly unemployed and looking for part-time work, and had a job offer by the time I left for another trip the next week. Chances are, your peers are probably also looking for similar jobs and might have rejected a full-time offer that might be good enough for you temporarily. Also, don't be afraid to ask companies for part-time, temporary positions. I interviewed for a company that pretty desperately needed more people and was surprised at how little pushback I got when I asked for a part-time gig.

**Don't be picky.** This is a temporary stop-gag, not your dream job. You don't need to love the mission or even the people, you just need something to tide you over while you _do_ find that perfect fit. I had no interest in working in the microbiome field after I graduated, but I was super willing to do it for the quick and easy cash. Plus, if you find a job that is easy and that you're good at, it'll give you even more time to figure out your next career move.

I've seen a lot of PhD students really struggle through their last six months, in large because the existential question of finding a job weighs on them so heavily, in addition to all the other things they're doing. I've also met so many postdocs who are in their position simply because they didn't really know what else to do, and who struggle and tread water because they've already initiated the academic path but aren't super sure that's what they want. What I never heard about or saw myself during my PhD was this third option: temporarily finding a way to make money and free up your time so that you can really explore options and make a strategic next career move. As more students recognize the need to prepare for non-academic careers during their PhD, I hope this option becomes a normal part of the conversation. Tell all your friends!
