---
title: 'HackPrep 2'
date: 2019-12-01
permalink: /posts/2020/03/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - web-development 
  - category
---

HackPrep is one of Unicode's original initiatives designed to introduce the first years of Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering to the world of development. Named HackPrep, the event serves as an introduction to the concept of the students to the grueling world of Hackathons and aims to equip them with few tricks and trades that will help them perform at hackathons.


This year, HackPrep was held on the 8th of March,2020. The event was divided into two main streams - Web Development and App development. Each student was to choose one between the two streams. The workshop was conducted by the TE mentors of the committee, under the guidance of the BE mentors. The audience comprised of mainly FE students from the Computer Engineering and IT branch of Dwarkadas J. Sanghvi College of Engineering. As part of the preparation for the workshop, the students were provided with the necessary software and resources prior to the workshop, in order to ensure that all students would be at the same pace.

For Web Development, they were first introduced to FrontEnd and Web Design aspects, followed by a tutorial on Python which was necessary as they introduced Django, a Python framework, as their choice of BackEnd tool. Android followed a similar pattern where they were introduced to Java, Android Studio and they worked on a timer application.

While the topics taught and level covered, made sure that all students were catered to, what made this workshop stand out amidst the hundreds of generic tutorials is the way it was conducted. The aim of this workshop wasn't just to impart knowledge, but also to be able to share experiences and sow seeds that would inspire the students to work on their skills. Each mentor approached each topic carefully, not just teaching concepts or syntax but by showing and implementing live examples. They shared their own stories at various hackathons, that hopefully will inspire the lot to take part in one on their own.

Another unique takeaway of this session was the demonstration of past projects that were made by the mentors themselves. The students were shown actual projects, and also were given a small sneak peek, behind the hacks used to implement them. The nature with which this session was conducted, allowed the audience to take active part in the discussion, ask doubts and learn organically.

At the end, the workshop was a resounding success. The FE students went back after 8 hours, which gave them initiative to work on problem statements of real hackathons that were shared by the organizers.

You too can access the links for the projects performed by the students in the session for Web Development and Android Development
