title: 
link: https://claireduvallet.wordpress.com/2018/01/21/__trashed/
author: cduvallet
description: 
post_id: 1459
created: 2018/01/21 14:45:22
created_gmt: 2018/01/21 14:45:22
comment_status: open
post_name: __trashed
status: trash
post_type: post

# 

In this post, I'm going to go through some tricks I've learned to plot pretty boxplots in Python. 

Boxplots are my absolute favorite way to look at data, but the defaults in Python aren't publication-level pretty. When making boxplots, I think it's very important to also plot the underlying raw data points whenever that's possible. Especially for main text figures and/or in cases without that many points, this is the best way to simultaneously summarize the data and allow the reader to come to their interpretations of it. When I read a paper, I get fairly grumpy when I know that the sample size is low (say, less than 100) but I only get to see the boxplot. Just let me see the data - otherwise, I have to wonder if you're trying to hide something... Anyway. In this post, we'll be using `seaborn` to establish the main boxplots, with some additional tweaking to make them beautiful. Of course, I didn't come up with these solutions all on my own, and deep gratitude goes to Stack Overflow for teaching me these tricks (in addition to almost everything else I know about coding). 

# Generate data

First, let's set up some toy data. Here, we'll be simulating making some measurements on three different body sites for 15 healthy patients and 10 diseased patients. 

In [70]:
    
    
    import pandas as pd
    import numpy as np
    
    # Set up the data
    data = np.concatenate(
        [[np.random.normal(loc=1, size=15), 15*['site1'], 15*['healthy']],
         [np.random.normal(loc=3, size=15), 15*['site2'], 15*['healthy']],
         [np.random.normal(loc=0, size=15), 15*['site3'], 15*['healthy']],
         [np.random.normal(loc=1, size=10), 10*['site1'], 10*['disease']],
         [np.random.normal(loc=1, size=10), 10*['site2'], 10*['disease']],
         [np.random.normal(loc=3, size=10), 10*['site3'], 10*['disease']]], 
        axis=1)
    df = pd.DataFrame(columns=['value', 'site', 'label'], data=data.T)
    df['value'] = df['value'].astype(float)
    
    # Show every ninth row
    df.iloc[::9]
    

Out[70]:

value site label

0
-0.013008
site1
healthy

9
1.477600
site1
healthy

18
3.598471
site2
healthy

27
3.775151
site2